Engineering 
55 
 In some modules there are outcomes that you must achieve  to pass the module , but that are not part of the 
formula normally used in a given module to calculate your final mark . To assess your achievement of tho se 
outcomes,  subminima  are normally used on certain assessments (or parts of assessments) . The outcomes 
and subminima are made known at the start of the semester (normally in the relevant module framework).  If 
you do  not satisfy the subminimum  for a certain outcome, it means that you have not met that outcome. In 
that case, your  final mark for the module may not exceed 45. D uring or after the completion of the 
semester’s classes it may also become clear that you  can no longer  pass the module because of a 
subminimum . If that happens,  you will normally not be admitted to further assessment opportunities for the 
particular module. In examination modules this can lead to your  class mark being limited to 35 or less. 
4.3  Undergraduate subjects, modules and m odule  
contents 



36315 Advanced Design (Civil)  



446 (15) Design Project (2L; 6P) 
Each student completes a comprehensive design. The design can be done from any of the three subject 
areas. The detailed design is done by each student indiv idually. 

Required Modules:  
P (Hydraulics 354 and Hydraulic Engineering 424) or P (Transportation 364 and Transportation 434) or  
P (Structural Design 354 and Structural Design 424)  



20753 Applied Mathematics B 



124 (15) Statics (4L; 2T)  
Vectors; forces; sum of forces at a point; direction cosines and direction angles; components and component 
vectors; scalar products; vector products; moment of a force; force systems on rigid bodies; equivalent force 
systems; couples; line of action of the resultant; equilibrium of a rigid body; friction; centre of mass; centroid; volumes; definite integration; moment of inertia of areas.  




154 (15) Dynamics ( 3.5L;  3T)  
Kinematics of particles in o ne and two dimensions : linear and curvilinear motion; Cartesian, polar and 
cylindrical coordinate systems; normal -tangential coordinates; relative motion; pulley systems. Kinetics of 
particles : the equations of motion; work and energy; power; impulse and m omentum; impact.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Mathematics 115  
P Applied Mathematics B 124  



224 (15) Dynamics of Rigid Bodies (3L; 3T) 
Planar kine matics of rigid bodies : rotation and translation; absolute motion; relative motion; instantaneous 
centre of zero velocity; Planar kinetics of rigid bodies: mass moment of inertia; the equations of motion; work and energy; impulse and momentum; angular impulse and angular momentum. Vibrations of particles and rigid bodies.  

Required Modules:  
P Applied Mathematics 144 or  P Applied Mathematics B 154  Engineering 
56 
 


242 (8) Vector Analysis  (2L; 1,5T) 
The straight line and the plane; space curves, derivatives a nd integrals of vectors, curves, unit tangent 
vectors, arc length; surfaces, partial derivatives of vectors, the gradient vector, vector fields, vector 
differential operators; line integrals, gradient fields; surface integrals in the plane, Green’s theorem , surface 
integrals in space, Stokes’ theorem; volume integrals; Divergence theorem; centres of mass and moments of 
inertia of 1 -, 2- and 3 -dimensional bodies. 

Required Modules:  
C Applied Mathematics B 224  
P Enginee ring Mathematics 145  



252 (8) Applied Mathematics for Civil Engineers  (2L; 1T) 
Mathematical modelling: correct identification of problems and specification of assumptions;  formulation of 
ordinary and partial differential equations; analytical solutions; interpretation of a solution in terms of the 
initial problem.  




39020 Building Materials  



254 (15) Basic Building Materials Practice (3 L; 2P; 1T) 
Composition, manufacturing, mechanical behaviour and durability  of construction materials in civil 
engineering, including concrete, masonry, polymers, steel and timber; test methods for control and 
characterisation.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Chemistry 123  or P Engineering Chem istry 143  



11576 Chemical Engineering 



224 (15) Principles and Processes of Chemical Engineering (3 L; 3T) 
Introduction to processes and basic unit operations with their depiction on flow diagrams; principles of mass and energy balancing, phase diagrams; examples of typical chemical manufacturing processes and 
inherently safer design principles.  
Home Departmen t: Chemical Engineering 
Required Modules:  
P Engineering Chemistry 123  or P Engineering Chemistry 143  



254 (15) Mass and Energy Balances (3L; 3T) 
Mass balances, energy balances, heats of reaction and of solution, vapour- liquid and liquid -liquid phase 
equilibria, ideal solutions, Raoult ’s law, Henry’s constant, energy balances over process systems, combined 
mass and energy balances.  
Required Modules:  
PP Chemical Engineering 224  
P Thermodynamic s A 224  Engineering 
57 
 


264 (15) Fluid Mechanics for Chemical Engineers (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
2 Practicals per semester  
Physical properties of liquids and gases; dimensional analysis and related calculations; fluid statics; fluid 
kinematics; fluid dynamics; continuity, momentum and energy equations; viscous flow in pipes and closed ducts; friction charts; flow in non -round channels; flow measurement; losses in pipe systems, series and 
parallel pipes; boundary layers; turbomachinery; design of pump and piping systems; compressible flow; 
pipes and fittings  

Required Module s:  
P Applied Mathematics B 224  
P Thermodynamics A 224 
P Engineering Mathematics 214  



271 (15) Supplementary Studies A (3 L; 3T) 
The module content is arranged according to the requirements of individual students.  




316 (15) Reaction Engineering I (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Mole balance, reaction stoichiometry and conversion; homogeneous reactions; the reaction rate law; 
principles of reactor design; ideal batch reactors; constant flow reactors: plug flow, continuous stirred tank, 
packed bed; design for simple and multiple re actions; influence of temperature and pressure; non -ideal flow; 
residence time distribution; data analysis and modelling of various reaction systems.  

Required Module s:  
C Chemical Engineering 317  
P Chemical Engineering 254  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  



317 (15) Thermodynamics (3L; 1P; 2T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Equations of state for real gases and thermodynamic transformation relationships, thermodynamic 
properties of pure components, mixing rules for no n-ideal vapour mixtures, vapour liquid equilibria, theory 
and application of solution thermodynamics  and excess Gibbs energy , chemistry of reaction equilibria, multi-
component and multi -phase equilibrium. Simulation of selected thermodynamic behaviour , using standard 
process simulation packages.  

Required Module s:  
PP Thermodynamics A 224 
PP Chemical Engineering 254  
PP Chemical Engineering 264  
Any two of the above three modules are required.  
P Thermodynamics A 224 
P Chemical Engineering 254  
P Chemical Engineering 264  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  
P Engineering Mathematics 242  



344 (15) Process Modelling and Analysis  (3L; 2T) 
Dynamic modelling and simulation of single and integrated process units. Laplace domain modelling and block diagram representations. Process data analysis and introduction to machine learning.  

Required Module s:  
PP En gineering Mathematics 214  
P Engineering Statistics 243  
P Numerical Methods 262  
C Chemical Engineering 316  Engineering 
58 
 


354 (15) Reaction Engineering II (3 L; 2T) 
Reaction mechanisms. Energy balances in reactor design; design of complex homogeneous and/or 
heterogeneous non -isothermal reaction systems; catalytic reactions; deactivation of catalysts; external and 
internal mass transfer.  

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 316  
P Heat Transfer A 326  



367 (15) Mass Transfer Operations (3L; 2T) 
Distillation: batch and continuous distillation; McCabe -Thiele graphical method; multicomponent, extractive 
and pressure- swing distillation; plate and packed columns; gas absorption; other mass transfer unit 
operations consisting of a selection from: cooling towers, drying, liquid- liquid extraction, crystallisation and 
adsorption.  

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 317  



371 (15) Supplementary Studies (1L ) 
The module content is arranged according to the requirements of individual students.  




424 (15) Bioprocess Engineering (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Chemical composition of cells; cellular structure and classification; nutrient requirements; metabolic 
macromolecules, their structures and functions; energy generation, storage and transfer; basic cellular 
metabolism; basic recombinant DNA technology; process design equations for batch, fed- batch and 
continuous bioprocesses; endogenous respiration and energy  of maintenance concepts; measurement and 
prediction of oxygen transfer rate; bioreactor scale -up; thermal death and degradation kinetics; batch and 
continuous sterilisation; downstream processing. 

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 254 
C Chemical Engineering 316  



426 (15) Process Control (3L; 1P; 2T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Control objectives, feedback control and dynamic performance of control systems, digital and practical implementation of feedback control, enhancements to single loop feedback control, multivariable control, 
simulation/design of control design, simulation/design of control systems . 

Required Modules:  
PP Engineering Mathematics 242  
P Chemical Engineering 316  
P Chemical Engineering 344  



41696 Chemical Engineering D  



316 (8) Laboratory and Pilot Studies I (2 T; 6P) 
2 Practicals per semester  
Introduction to experimental design. Processing, interpretation and reporting of experimental data. Effective technical communication. Appropriate technical writing style and referencing. Structuring and writing of 
coherent technical reports. Structuring and delivering oral presentations.  

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 264  
P Engineering Statistics 243  Engineering 
59 
 


356 (15) Laboratory  and Pilot S tudies  II (1L; 6P) 
4 Major practicals per semester  
Design and conduct practical experiments on laboratory and pilot plant scale. Evaluation, interpretation and 
writing complete technical reports on the experiments. Sampling and practical data interpretation on chemical plants.  
[Presented by the Department of Chemical Engineering (85%)]  
Techniques in analytical chemistry: principles of analysis, choice of analytical method, sample preparation. 
Selected methods, among others UV/vis, AA and mass spectroscopy, chromatography, ICP (8 l , 3 
demonstrations).  
[Presented by the Department of Chemistry and Polymer Science (15%)]  

Required Modules:  
C Heat Transfer A 326  
C Chemical Engineering 316  
C Chemical Engineering 367  
C Mineral Processing 345  
P Chemical Engineering D 316  



11479 Chemistry  



176 (32) Introduction to Chemistry (3L; 3P) 
For students in the  BSc (Extended Curriculum Programmes) . This module deals with the following themes: 
classification of matter; atoms, molecules and ions; stoichiometry; reactions in aqueous solutions; atomic structure; chemical bonding and molecular structure; the periodic table; weak acids and weak bases; 
electrochemistry; introduction to basic organic chemistry. Examples that illustrate the importance and relevance of science as an everyday phenomenon will be highlighted.  




48321 Chemistry C  



152 (6) Chemistry Laboratory Practicals  (3P) 
Development of laboratory skills by performing introductory chemistry experiments.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Chemistry 123  or P Engineering Chemistry 143  



224 (15) Industrial Chemistry I ( 4L; 2P) 
8 Practicals per semester  
Bonding models; solid- state chemistry; introduction to coordination chemistry. Chemical thermodynamics, 
statistical mechanical understanding of entropy, applications of Gibbs free energy, chemical and phase equilibrium, electrochemistry, colligative properties, elementary chemical kinetics.  

Required Modules:  
PP Engineering Chemistry 123  or PP Engineering Chemistry 143  
PP Chemistry C 152  



254 (15) Industrial Chemistry II (4 L; 2P) 
8 Practicals per semester  
Organic chemistry: basic nomenclature, introduction to preparation and reactions of alkenes, alkynes, alkyl halides, alcohols, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters, among others; Introduction to polymer chemistry: chemistry of polymerisation reactions, int er alia  polyesters, polyamides. 

Required Modules:  
P Chemistry C  224 Engineering 
60 
 


18481 Civil Engineering  



224 (15) Measurement, Problem-solving and Communication skills (3 L; 2,5T ) 
Problem solving theory and practice; outcome prediction and assessment; risk evaluation and mitigation; 
complexity and uncertainty. Effective written and oral communication; development of s ound argument; 
synthesis and interpretation; paraphrasing, quoting and referencing.  Utilisation of data: Microsoft Excel  
functions, data visualisation tools, basic data sets . Introduction to statistics: discrete and continuous random 
variables, medians, st andard deviation.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 115  



13362 Complementary Studies (Eng)  



311 (4 ) Community Interaction and Leadership Development (3T) 
Community interaction in the context of Stellenbosch University and South Africa. Contextual leadership 
themes, challenges and opportunities.  

Required Modules:  
Must be in at least the third year of registration in a four -year BEng programme, or in at least the fourth year of 
registration in a BEng extended curriculum programme . 



441 (4 ) Community Interaction and Leadership Development (3T) 
Community interaction in the context of Stellenbosch University and South Africa. Contextual leadership themes, challenges and opportunities . 

Required Modules:  
Must be in at least the third year of registration in a four -year BEng programme , or in at least the fourt h year of 
registration in a BEng extended curriculum programme .  



451 (4) Legal and Safety Aspects of Engineering Practice (2L)  
Contract and intellectual property aspects of engineering practice. Public liability considerations in product development and production. Safety considerations and implications of the Occupational Health and Safety 
Act in engineering practice.  




30317 Computer Programming  



143 (12) Computer Programming (3 L; 2P) 
Introduction to computer systems. Introduction to a programming environment; expressions; conditional 
statements; iterative structures; data types; static and dynamic data structures; file handling; abstract data 
types; objects; structured program design. Emphasis is placed on modular programming for engineering 
applications.  
[Presented by the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering (75%) and by the Department of Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering (25%)]  




18139 Computer Science  



314 (16) Concurrency (3L; 3P) 
Introduction to programming techniques and principles of concurrent systems, from operating systems to 
application programs. This includes communication, synchronisation, scheduling and load balancing. Several 
parallel and distributed architectures will be covered.  

Required modules:  P Computer Science 214  or P Computer Science E 214  
P Computer Science 244  or P Computer Systems 245  Engineering 
61 
 


315 (16) Machine Learning (3L; 3T) 
Dimension reduction techniques; machine -learning techniques based on maximum- likelihood, maximum-
posterior and expectation -maximi sation estimates; modelling using logistic regression, Gaussian mixtures 
and hidden Markov models. 

Required Modules:  
For programmes in Engineering:  
P Computer Science 144 or P Computer Science E 214  
P Mathematics 214 or P Applied Mathematics 214 or P Engineering Mathematics 214  
P (Mathematical Statistics  245 and Mathematical Statistics 246) or P Systems and Signals 344  



343 (16) Databases and Web Centric Programming (3L; 3P) 
Introduction to relational databases. Mapping relational model onto object model. Implementing a database 
application in the context of the web. Web services.  Server- side scalability. Virtualization. Cloud Computing. 

Required Modules:  
For programmes in Engineering:  
P Computer Science E 214  
P Computer Systems 245  
For other programmes: please refer to the Yearbook part for the Faculty of Science. 



344 (16) Program Design (3L; 3P)  
Program specifications as guidelines for program design; reusable frameworks for program design; testability of program designs; developmen t of a medium -sized system to illustrate the practical application 
of the principles of program design.  

Required Modules:  
P Computer Science 214 or P Computer Science E 214  



59536 Computer Science E  



214 (15) Object -Oriented Programming (3L; 3P) 
Formulation and solution of problems by means of computer programming in an object- oriented set-up; 
principles of testing and debugging; key concepts in object orientation: abstraction, encapsulation, 
inheritance and polymorphism; design patterns as abstra ctions for the creation of reusable object- oriented 
designs; searching and sorting algorithms; complexity theory for the analysis of algorithms; fundamental 
methods in the design of algorithms; dynamic data structures.  

Required Modules:  
PP Computer Programming 143  
P Engineering Mathematics 115  
P Engineering Mathematics 145  



414 (15) Machine Learning (3L; 3T)  
This module is identical  to Machine Learning A 742 .  
Prominent  machine learning concepts and tasks. Selected feature extraction or dimensionality reduction 
techniques. Introduction to probabilistic modelling and latent variable models. Fundamental paradigms in parameter estimation.  

Required Modules:  
P Computer Science E 214  or P Computer Science 144  
P Mathematics 214 or P Applied Mathematics 214 or P Engineering Mathematics 214  
P (Mathematical Statistics 245 and Mathematical Statistics 246)  or P Systems and Signals 344  Engineering 
62 
 


50040 Computer Skills  



176 (8) Computer Skills  (1L; 4T) 
This module is taken by students in the BSc (Extended Curriculum Programme s). Utilisation of computers in 
computer users’ areas on campus. Introduction to an operating system, Internet, E -mail, word processing, 
spreadsheet and presentation software.  
Home  Department: Mathematical Sciences  



36153 Computer Systems  



214 (15) Introduction to Computer Systems (3 L; 2P; 1T) 
Boolean algebra; combinational and sequential circuit analysis and design; state machines; central 
processing unit; assembler language programming . 

Required Modules:  
P Computer Programming 143  or P (Computer Science 114 and Computer Science 144)  



245 (15) Microprocessors (3L; 3P) 
Microprocessor programming; basic microprocessor architecture; bus, memory and input- output systems.  

Required Modules:  
C Computer Systems 214  



414 (15) Computer Systems (3 L; 1P; 1T) 
Programmable logic; hardware description languages; embedded systems; computer networks.  

Required Modules:  
C Computer Systems 245  



23965 Control Systems 



314 (15) Classical Control Systems (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T ) 
Classical feedback control of dynamic systems; feedback control architecture; dynamic modelling of 
mechanical, electronic and electro- mechanical systems; transfer functions; block diagrams; stability; 
transient effects and steady state error; root locus analysis and  
design; freq uency response analysis and design; PID controllers; lead and lag compensation.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Mathematics 214  



344 (15) Modern Control Systems (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T ) 
Continuous state space models, analysis and synthesis; continuous estimators; transient and steady state response of state variable representations; pole placement for finite time responses; Discrete systems, Z -
transforms; ZOH circuits, difference equations; emulation design; discrete root locus; discrete state space analysis and design; practical issues: A/D and D/A convertors, quantisation effects and anti -aliasing filters.  

Required Modules:  
C Control Systems 314  Engineering 
63 
 


354 (18) Design of Control Systems for Mechanical and Mechatronic Systems  
(4L; 1P; 2T) 
Design of control systems: PID controllers; lead and lag compensation; frequency response analysis design. 
Continuous state space models, analysis and synthesis; continuous estimators; transient and steady state response of state variable representations; pole placement techniques. Discrete control systems, Z-
transforms; ZOH circuits; difference equations; practical considerations: A/D and  D/A converters and filters. 
Until 2021: Root locus design; discrete root locus.  
From 2022 : Bode and polar plot diagrams   

Required Modules:  
P Modelling 334  



414 (15) Non -linear Control Systems (3 L; 1P; 1T) 
Modelling of non- linear systems; analysis and synthesis using describing functions, phase plane and 
Lyapunov methods. Discrete state -variable models for sampled plants, pole placement feedback and 
observer analysis and synthesis for regulators and servo  trackers. Optimal LR and Kalman observer analysis 
and synthesis.  

Required Modules:  
C Control Systems 344  



13856  Data Analytics (Eng)  



324 (15) Statistics and Data Analytics  for Civil Engineers (3L; 2,5T)  
Offered from 2021.  
Probability distributions, sampling theory, correlation analysis, statistic al inference, regression . Formal data 
analytics processes: goal definition, data pre -processing, mining and modelling, validation and evaluation . 
Data cleaning: filtering, handling of missing data, inconsistency detection, outlier removal, data normalisation, 
reduction. Introducti on to machine learning: supervised and unsupervised learning.  
[Presented by: Statistics and Actuarial Science (50%) and Electrical and  Electronic Engineering (50%)] 

Required Modules:  
P Civil Engineeri ng 224  
PP Engineering Mathematics 115  
PP Engineering Mathematics 145  



344 (15) Data Analytics Applications in Industrial Engineering (3L; 2P; 1T) 
The need for data analytics; formal data analytics processes , including CRISP -DM and KDD; data cleaning 
and data transformation with dimension reduction; supervised learning: regression, k -nearest neighbours, 
decision trees , random forests; unsupervised learning: k -means; data- driven decision -making; group project.  
[Presented by the Department of Industrial Engineering ( 78%) and the Department of Mechanical and 
Mechatronic Engineering ( 22%)] 

Required Modules:  
PP Engineering Mathematics 214  
P Engineering Statistics 314  or P P robability Theory and Statistics 114 or P Modelling 334 followed  in 2021 or later  



414 (15)  Data Analytics  Applications in Electrical and  Electronic Engineering  
(3L; 1P; 1 T) 
The goal of data analytics and machine learning; data cleaning and preparation; training, validation and test sets; regression: linear regression; classification: K -nearest neighbours, naive Bayes, logistic regression, 
decision trees; unsupervised learning: K -means; data visualisation: PCA, t -SNE; a brief introduction to neural 
networks; group project.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  
P Systems and Signals 344 or P Mathematical Statistics 214  Engineering 
64 
 


14019 Data Engineering  



245 (12) Big Data Platforms  (3L; 1P; 1T) 
The various technologies and infrastructure required to support effective decision -making based on big data, 
including databases for big data, data warehouses, data platforms, data streams, data fusion and data 
visualisation.  

Required Modules:  
P Computer Programming 143  or P Computer Science 144  



414 (15) Fundamentals of Deep Learning (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T) 
Fundamentals of neural networks and their application in engineering problems. Limitations of neural 
networks. Design of f eed- forward neural networks, auto -encoders, convolutional neural networks and 
recurrent neural networks.  Technical report writing. A m ajor design assignment  that also involves 
experiments for validation, culminating in a report. 

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 214 or P Mathematics 214 or P Applied Mathematics 214  
P Systems and Signals 344 or P Mathematical Statistics 214  



424 (15) Probabilistic Graphical Models for Machine Learning (3L; 1P; 1T ) 
Representation: reasoning patterns, Bayes nets, Markov random fields, templates and temporal models. 
Inference: elimination, sum product, max product, max sum and junction tree algorithms. Learning: maximum 
likelihood, maximum posterior, Bayesian learning. Designing algorithms to implement the aforementioned.  

Required Modules:  
P Systems and Signals 344 or P Mathematical Statistics 245  



14026  Data Science  



141 (16) Data Science  (4L; 2P) 
Fundamental data science concepts; d ata-analytic thinking; t ypes of data; the data cyc le; CRISP data mining 
process; d escribing a dataset numerically; d escribing a dataset graphically; o rganising data; f ile formats; d ata 
manipulation in R software; introduction to predictive modelling; o verfitting; data leakage; model evaluation; 
other data science tasks and techniques; d ata ethics ; communicating results.  




46833 Design (E)  



314 (15) Digital Design (1 L; 3P) 
Design philosophy; design techniques; milestones; data interpretation; development of simple software and 
hardware in order to demonstrate a small functional microprocessor system; debugging of digital circuits; 
report writing.  

Required Modules:  
C Computer Systems 245  



344 (15) Electronic Design (1L; 3P) 
Design of a complex electronic system with circuit and software components; problem solution; application 
of scientific and engineering kno wledge; design techniques for software and circuits; experiments; data-
interpretation; fault diagnosis; use of equipment and software; independent learning; technical report writing. 

Required Modules:  
C Electronics 315  
C Computer Science E 214  Engineering 
65 
 


47929 Design Project  



488 (48) Design (9T) 
Methods of process design (including heuristics), inherently safe design, control, plant layout, process flow 
sheets, complex plant material and energy balances, piping and instrumentation diagrams, equipment 
selection, risk management, HAZOP studies, cost estimation and profitability. Application of procedural and 
non- procedural methods to develop the best process for a major plant design, and factors and criteria 
invol ved. The identification, formulation, analysis and solution of a complex process -plant design problem 
through the synthesis of unit operations, including application of mathematical, natural and engineering sciences and appropriate engineering methods and tools.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year Enrolment  



11949 Electrical Drive Systems 



324 (15) Principles of Electrical Machines and Power Electronics (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Non- ideal transformer model; introduction to machine principles; alternating current machine principles; 
basic working in the steady state of synchronous generators, synchronous motors and induction motors; 
inverter- fed induction machine drives; basic working in the steady state of direct current motors and direct 
current generators; converter -fed direct current machine drives; basic working of single -phase induction 
motors ; introduction to electrical energy storage technologies . 

Required Modules:  
C Electrotechnique  214 



51357 Electromagnetics  



314 (15) Electromagnetics (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Electrostatics; magnetostatics; Ohmic conduction; Lorentz force law; laws of Coulomb, Ampère, Faraday and 
Gauss; Maxwell’s equations; capacitance; inductance.  

Required Modules:  
C Applied Mathematics B 224  
C Applied Mathematics B 242  



344 (15) Electromagnetics (3L; 1,5P;  1,5T) 
Maxwell’s equations; electromagnetic waves; transmission lines; antennas.  

Required Modules:  
C Electromagnetics 314  



39802 E lectronic Engineering  



152 (6) Introduction to Electronic D esign  (3T) 
Basic structured electronic design and synthesis.  




12491 Electronics  



245 (15) Electronics (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Semiconductor physics; pn junctions; diode circuits ; thyristors; bipolar transistors; MOSFETs; DC biasing of 
transistor circuits; transistor switches; logical gates . 

Required Modules:  
C Systems and Signals 214 or  C Electrotechnique  214 Engineering 
66 
 


315 (15) Electronics (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T) 
BJT, FET and power amplifiers; frequency response of  transistor amplifiers; current sources ; differential and 
operational amplifiers . 

Required Modules:  
C Electronics 245  



344 (15) Introduction to Elec tronics (3 L; 1,5P; 1,5T) 
2021: Only offered for students repeating this module.  
Semi- conductor physics; pn junctions; diode circuits; bipolar transistors; small signal dynamic transistor 
models.  




414 (15) Electronics (3L; 1P; 1T) 
The terminal properties of power electronic switches; basic DC- to-DC converters: the buck, boost and buck -
boost converters; half -bridge  and full-bridge converters; switch -mode power supplies; basic inductor and  
transformer design; simulation and closed -loop control of converters ; DC-to-AC inverters and control; the 
converter -fed DC machine system; the converter -fed induction machine system .  

Required Modules:  
C Electronics 315 
C Control Systems 314  



12599 Electrotechnique  



143 (15) Introduction to Circuit Theory (3,5L; 1P; 2T) 
Introduction to basic circuit terminology and elements, including  dependent sources; Ohm’s law, Kirchhoff’s 
laws; node -voltage analysis and mesh -current analysis; superposition; Thévenin and Norton equivalents; 
basic DC power and energy concepts; introduction to capacitors and inductors; first- order RC and RL circuit 
steady- state and transient analysis; modelling of physical systems using RL and RC circuits; introduction to 
magnetic circuits . 




214 (15) Electro technique (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Sinusoidal sources; phasors; instant aneous, average , real and reactive power; passive circuit elements in the 
frequency domain; balanced three -phase circuits; first - and second -order transfer functions; Bode plots; 
cascade d circuits; resonance; ideal filters; ideal operational amplifiers . 

Required Modules:  
C Electrotechnique  143 



43915 Energy Systems  



244 (15) Electrical Energy Systems (3 L; 0,5P; 2,5T) 
Introduction to power systems; single and three -phase alternating current theory; power transformers; per-
unit system; modelling of transmission lines; steady -state operation of transmission lines ; power flow studies .  

Required Modules:  
C Systems and Signals 214  



344 (15) E nergy Conversion (3L;  1P; 2T) 
Introduction to electrical machine systems; DC machine principles; steady- state operation of DC machines; 
AC machine principles ; steady- state operation of synchronous and induction machines; finite element 
modelling and analys is of electrical machines; basic control aspects of DC and induction machines; dq0 
transformation; dq0 AC machine modelling and dynamics.  

Required Modules:  
C Energy Systems 244  Engineering 
67 
 


414 (15) Renewable Energy Systems (3L; 0 ,5P; 1,5T) 
Introduction to renewable energy resources; principle of renewable energy power conversion; commercially 
viable renewable energy technologies; renewable energy system sizing and design; maximum power point 
control  technology; power conditioning and grid integration of renewable energy systems; economic 
benefits and environmental impact assessment.  

Required Modules:  
C Energy Systems 344  



424 (15) Electrical Energy Systems (3 L; 0,5P ; 1,5T) 
Power systems: symmetrical components; symmetric and asymmetric faults, protection systems; power system stability. High voltage: HV measuring equipment; measuring techniques and tests; insulation 
coordination; t heory and characteristics of insulating materials; electrical discharges.  

Required Modules:  
C Energy Systems 244  
C Energy Systems 344  



51365 Energy Systems M  



434 (15) Mechanical Energy Systems (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Thermodynamic relationships for ideal and non -ideal gases, Joule -Thompson throttling effect; further 
applications of air-water- vapour mixtures in the psychrometrics of air conditioning systems and cooling 
towers; mass and energy balances for react ive systems; the principles of internal combustion engines. Boiler, 
pump and atmospheric cooling systems; advanced analysis of vapour and combination power cycles; Stirling cycle; high -pressure water and pebble bed modular nuclear reactor -based cycles; introduction to solar 
energy; analytical determination of available radiant energy; central collector; parabolic trough and solar chimney power station cycles. Wind and ocean energy.  

Required Modules:  
P Fluid Mechanics 244  
P Thermodynamics A 214  



49484 Engineering Chemistry 



123 (15) Chemistry for Engineering Students ( 4L; 2T) 
Basic concepts, units and dimensions, significant figures, conversion between unit systems; components of matter, atomic structure, the periodic table and chemical bonding; stoichiometry; chemical reactions (acid-
base, precipitation and redox); properties of mixtures and solutions; chemical equilibrium; electrochemistry; 
gas laws,  state functions and the relationships betw een T, P and V ; introduction to basic engineering 
applications.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Mathematics 115  
 



143 (15) Chemistry for Engineering Students  (Supplementary Module) ( Hybrid Format) 
Basic concepts, units  and dimensions, significant figures, conversion between unit systems; components of 
matter, atomic structure, the periodic table and chemical bonding; stoichiometry; chemical reactions (acid -
base, precipitation and redox); properties of mixtures and solut ions; chemical equilibrium; electrochemistry; 
gas laws, state functions and the relationships between T, P and V ; introduction to basic engineering 
applications.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Chemistry 123 (must be completed in the same academic year  as Engineering Chemistry 143. This 
implies that if you fail Engineering Chemistry 143, you must take Engineering Chemistry  123 again. ) 
Departmental approval: Registration depends on your overall academic record and the available  capacity.  
 Engineering 
68 
 


46825 Engineering Drawings  



123 (15) Orthographic Drawings (1L; 3P; 3T) 
Projection planes; points, lines and planes in space; trace points of lines and trace lines of planes; true 
lengths and true angles  between lines and planes; true angles between planes; new projection planes; 
interpenetrations; developments; isometric projections. Works drawings: 1st - and 3rd -angle projections; line 
alphabet; dimensioning; scale; three -view drawing layout; auxiliary v iews; hidden detail; introduction to 
sections and cross -hatching. Introduction to 2D CAD and 3D parametric CAD.  




143 (15) Orthographic Drawings ( Supplementary M odule ) (Hybrid Format ) 
Projection planes; points, lines and planes in space; trace points of lines and trace lines of planes; true lengths and true angles between lines and planes; true angles between planes; new projection planes; 
interpenetrations; developments; isometric projections. Works drawings: 1st - and 3rd -angle projections; line 
alphabet; dimensioning; scale; three -view drawing layout; auxiliary views; hidden detail; introduction to 
sections and cross -hatching . Introduction to 2D CAD and 3D parametric CAD.  
Home Departm ent: Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering 
Required Modules:  C Engineering Drawings 123  (must be completed in the same academic year  as Engineering Drawings 143 . This 
implies that if you fail Engineering Drawings 143, you must  take Engineering Drawings 1 23 again. ) 
Departmental approval: Registration  depends on your  overall academic record and the available  capacity.
 



18791 Engineering Econom ics 



212 (8) Engineering Economics  (2L; 2T) 
Introduction to accounting: financing, tax and growth of a business. Income, balance sheet and cash flow statements. Financial ratios. 




354 (15) Engineering Economics (3L; 3T) 
The capital cycle, time value of money, discounted cash flow, equivalence and returns, after tax cas h flow 
analyses, inflation and exchange rates. Working capital cycles, the cost of capital, cost accounting, budgets. 
Introduction to the macro economy and the SA budget.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Economics 21 2 



59552 Engineering Geology  



214 (15) Geology for Civil Engineers (3L; 3P) 
This module does not grant admission to Geology 224, 244 and 254.  
Identification of, classification of and distinguishing between the common rock -forming minerals, based on 
their ch emistry and crystal structure. Classification of and distinguishing between the various sedimentary, 
igneous and metamorphic types. The basic processes affecting the earth and how they are interrelated 
through the paradigm of plate tectonics. Geological time and how the rock record preserves a history of past 
geological events. The general geological history and stratigraphy of southern Africa. General landscape-
forming processes, weathering, etc. Engineering geology of South Africa and most common geotechn ical 
constraints. Surveying techniques, including acquisition and analysis of spatial data; projections, coordinates 
and mapping; land surveying and 3D measurement utilising GIS, GPS and Total Station techniques.  
Presented by: Earth Sciences (30%) and Civi l Engineering (70%)  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Chemistry 123  or P Engineering Chemistry 143  Engineering 
69 
 


59560 Engineering Informatics  



244 (15) Object -Oriented Programming and Modelling (3L; 2,5T ) 
Basic concepts of object- oriented programming, illustrated through engineering applications of machine 
learning, data analytics and discrete simulation models.  

Required Modules:  
P Computer Programming 143  



314 (15) Foundation of the Finite Element Method (3L; 2,5T ) 
Boundary value problems and integral forms of physical problems, Galerkin  finite element methods for the 
solution of these problems, solution of syst ems of linear equations, implementation of a finite element object 
model.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Informatics 244  
P Applied Mathematics B 242  
P Strength of Materials 254  



51373 Engineering Management  



454 (15) Engineering Economics and Professional Practice (5L; 1T) 
Engineering economics: basic concepts, time value of money; relation between present, future and serial 
values; cash flow. Economic analysis, comparison and decision -making among alternatives: net p resent 
value, internal rate of return, cost/benefit models, handling of risk. Life cycle costing, depreciation and replacement decision. Development financing. 
Professional practice: Engineering Act, ethical code, professional registration and accountability. Practice 
management and business plans. Design and construction management, the role of the client. Sustainability. 
Tender documentation. Strategic management. Project safety. Infra structure asset management.  Build ing 
information  models. Communication skills.  




38571 Engineering Mathematics  



115 (15) Introductory Differential and Integral Calculus  (5L; 2T) 
To take this module, you must have a mark of at least 6 (or 70%) for Mathematics on your NSC or your I EB 
school -leaving certificate or must have successfully completed the first year of a suitable extended 
curriculum programme . 
Mathematical induction and the binomial theorem; functions; limits and continuity; derivatives and rules of differentiation; applications of differentiation; the definite and indefinite integral; integration of simple functions.  




145 (15) Further Differential and Integral Calculus (5 L; 2T) 
Complex numbers; transcendental functions; integration techniques; improper integrals; conic sections; polar coordinates; partial derivatives; introduction to matrices and determinants.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 115  



214 (15) Differential Equations and Linear Algebra (4 L; 2T) 
Ordinary differential equations of first order; linear differential equations of higher orders; Laplace transforms and applications. Matrices: linear independence, rank, eigenvalues.  

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematics 114 or PP Engineering Mathematics 115 or PP Mathematics 144 or PP Engineering Mathematics 
145  
P Mathematics 144 or P Engineering Mathematics 145  Engineering 
70 
 


242 (8) Series and Partial Differential Equations  (2L; 1T) 
Infinite series and Taylor series; Fourier series; introduction to partial differential equations; Fourier 
transforms.  

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematics 144 or PP Engineering Mathematics 145 or  PP Engineering Mathematics  214 
P Engineering Mathematics 214  



59420  Engineering Physics  



113 (8) Physics for Engineering Students  (2L; 0,5P; 0,5T ) 
Introduction to physics and physical quantities, including introduction to atomic physics; oscillatory motion, 
introduction to wave motion, superposition and standing waves, sound waves, light, refraction, polarisation; 
introduction to nuclear physics.  




152 (6) Physics for Engineering Students ( 2L; 1T) 
Introduction to basic relativity and basic quantum mechanics. Continued study of waves, acoustics and optics based on Engineering Physics 113.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Physics 113  



59498 Engineering Statistics  



243 (15) Statistics and Data Processing for Chemical Engineers (3L; 1P; 2,5T ) 
1 Practical per semester  
Applied probability theory; applications based on discrete and continuous random variables and their 
probability distributions. Descriptive statistics and graphical presentations. Simple and multiple linear 
regression. Hypothesis testing and a nalysis of variance. Experimental design. Error propagation . Applications 
to chemical engineering experiments and simulations. Technical communication of experimental results and 
statistical analysis.  
[Presented by the Department of Chemical Engineering (50%) and by the Department of Statistics and 
Actuarial Science (50%)] 

Required Modules:  
C Chemical Engineering 224  
C Chemical Engineering 264  



314 (15) Engineering Statistics (3L; 2,5T ) 
Applied probability theory; applications based on discrete and continuous random variables and their 
probability distributions, such as the normal, gamma, lognormal, log- Pearson type 3 (LP3), Gumbel (EV1) 
distributions; queuing processes; joint distributions; descriptive statistics and graphical presentations; moments, averages, median and standard deviations; moment generating functions; variation coefficient; skewness coefficient; peaking coefficient; sampling theory; point and interval estimation; hypothesis testing; 
μ2 and K- S testing; simple linear and non -linear regression and correlation analyses; introduction to multiple 
linear regression; introduction to analysis of variance and experimental design.  

Required Modules:  
PP Engineeri ng Mathematics 115  
PP Engineering Mathematics 1 45 Engineering 
71 
 


59501 Enterprise Design  



444 (15) Enterprise Design (2L; 2T) 
Systems engineering, approaches towards enterprise modelling and supply chain management. Concepts 
like knowledge management, innovation, and different life cycles will be applied through the complete 
design of an enterprise within formal information, manufacturing and organisational architectures.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



59455 Entrepreneurship (Eng)  



444 (15) Entrepreneurship (Eng) (3L; 3T) 
Business strategy: business as a system; life cycles; competitiveness forecasts; entry into the market; portfolio decisions; long -term profitability; marketing management; int roduction to the theory of organisation. 
Financial management: time -value of money, basic discounting concepts; economic analysis of investment 
proposals; introduction to financing and dividend decisions. 




50431 Environmental Engineering  



414 (15) Environmental Engineering (3L; 2,5T)  
Environmental engineering principles, including sustainable development; impacts of engineering 
developments on the broader environment; environmental impact assessments, environmental risk assessments and environmental management.  Workplace risks (OHS Act), HAZOP studies and workplace 
risk management. Water chemistry and engineering techniques for water treatment and potable water production, including material and energy balances. Aspects and abatement of air pollution. Solid - and 
hazardous -waste management and immobilisation.  

Required Modules:  
C Particle Technology 316  
C Chemical Engineering 316  



442 (8) Engineering and the Environment  (3L; 2T) 
Energy and the environment; environmental engineering principles, including sustainable development, ethical elements of environmental management and socio -ecological factors in decision- making; 
environmental assessments and management , including pollution control and abatement, environmental 
impact  and risk  assessments, environmental auditing, environmental management systems and ISO 


14000 
standards; environmental governance and related legislation.  

Required Modules:  
Prerequisite for Engineering students: All the prescribed modules for the first two years of the relevant BEng 
programme  
Prerequisite for AgriSciences students: All the modules for the first two years of the Wood Products Science 
programme  



452 (8) Environmental Engineering for Civil Engineers (3L; 2,5T)  
Ecology and the environment. Environmental engineering principles, ethical elements of environmental management . The water environment, including pollution, integrated envi ronmental processes and 
environmental assessments and management . Environmental governance and related legislation; solid 
waste management; i ntegrated development planning (IDP), including public participation . Integrated coastal 
management. Water quality, impacts of pollution on natural waterbodies, water quality considerations for 
drinking water abstraction. 

Required Modules:  
All the prescribed modules for the first two years of the relevant four-year BEng programme  Engineering 
72 
 


13683 Final -year Project  (C) 



478 (32) Final-year Project in Chemical Engineering (6P)  
(2P in Semester 1; 6P in Semester 2)  
Independent execution of a theoretical and/or experimental investigation in the field of chemical 
engineering, with formal oral presentations and the submission of a comprehensive final report.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



41726 Finite Element Methods 



414 (15) Finite Element Methods (Elective Module) (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Revision of strength of materials concepts; principle of virtual work; truss/beam elements; plane stress/strain elements; isoparametric formulation; 3D elements; axisymmetric elements; plate and shell 
elements; structural symmetry; dynamic analysis; buckling analysis; use of finite element software to solve 
simple problems.  

Required Modules:  
P Strength of Materials W 334  



474 (15) Finite Element Methods (Supplementary Module) (Hybrid Format)  
Revision of strength of materials concepts; principle of virtual work; truss/beam elements; plane 
stress/strain elements; isoparametric formulation; 3D elements; axisymmetric elements; plate and shell 
elements; structural symmetry; dynamic analysis; buckling analysis; use of finite element software to solve simple problems.  

Required Modules:  
C Finite Element Methods 414  



44415 Flu id Mechanics  



244 (15) First Course in Fluid Mechanics (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Physical properties of liquids and gases; fluid statics and manometers, forces on and stability of buoyant 
bodies, pressure centre and meta- centre; fluid kinematics; fluid dynamics; integral relations for a control 
volume; introduction to vector analysis; differential relations; continuity, momentum and energy equations; Bernoulli and Navier- Stokes equations; similarity theory, dimensional analysis; viscous flow in pipes and 
closed ducts; friction charts; flow in non -round channels; flow measurement; losses in pipe systems, series 
and parallel pipes; basic theory of turbomachines; pumps; characteristic curves of pumps; pump systems.  

Required Modules:  
P Applied Mathematics B 224  
P Thermodynamics A 214  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  



13857  Food Process Engineering  



414 (15) Food Process Engineering Fundamentals (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Engineering approach to problem- solving; thermodynamic properties of water and an ideal gas; 
conservation of mass, momentum and energy; thermodynamic processes in closed and open systems; 
generation, usage and reticulation of steam; pump and pipe systems; steady -state conduction, convection; 
air-water vapour mixtures and air conditioning processes. 

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematics (Bio) 124  
PP Food Science 244  Engineering 
73 
 


444 (15) Food Process Engineering Applications  (3L; 2T)  
Behaviour, pumping and properties of Newtonian and non -Newtonian fluids; the refrigeration cycle and 
refrigeration components and equipment; storage of food products by cooling and freezing; heat transfer, 
including the determination of heat transfer coefficients, boiling and condensation; transient heat transfer 
during heating, freezing and thawing; mass transfer; thermal processing of foodstuffs; evaporation and concentration; drying theory and drying equipment; mixing; process control. 

Required Modules:  
P Food Process Engineering 414  



39667 Geotechnique  



254 (15) Geotechnical Theories (3L; 2,5T ) 
Geotechnical soil properties: particle size analysis, plasticity, soil classification, phase relationships, 
compaction. Ground water movement: permeability, seepage theory, flow nets, filter design. Effective stress: 
theory of effective stress, stress by own weight and seepage effects. Elastic stress theory: stresses and 
immediate settlement resulting from surface loading. Consolidation settlement: settlement of clay soil, rate of settlement, total and immediate settlement.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Geology 214  



354 (15) Sliding Resistance, Retaining Walls, Foundations and Slopes  
(3L; 1,5P; 1T) 
Shear strength: shear testing, shear behaviour of sand and clay, stress paths, pore pressure coefficients. 
Lateral earth pressure: earth pressure theory, gravity walls, embedded walls. Bearing capacity: shallow 
foundations, eccentric loads, settlement on sand, piles. Slope  stability: parallel slips, circular slip, method of 
slices, safety factors.  
Practical: consolidation test in the oedometer. 

Required Modules:  
C Strength of Materials 224  
C Geotechnique 254  



33928 Heat Transfer A  



326 (15) Heat Transfer (3L; 1P; 2T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Heat conduction; steady and unsteady conduction. Convection: boundary layer equations, laminar and 
turbulent flow, natural convection, boiling and condensa tion. Heat exchangers: overall transfer coefficients, 
parallel, transverse and cross -flow, logarithmic mean temperature difference, effectiveness- NTU 
calculations, types and design principles. Radiation: absorption and emission, black bodies, emissivity, f orm 
factors, radiation heat transfer between surfaces, radiating gases. Mass transfer: diffusion processes, 
transport analogies, Colburn j- factors, combined mass and heat transfer.  

Required Modules:  
P Thermodynamics A  224 
P Chemical Engineering 254  
P Chemical Engineering 264  
P Engineering Mathematics 242  Engineering 
74 
 


414 (15) Heat Transfer (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Heat conduction; analytical and numerical methods for steady and unsteady conduction. Convection: 
boundary layer equations, laminar and turbulent flow, natural convection, boiling and condensation. Heat 
exchangers: overall transfer coefficients, parallel, transverse and cross -flow; logarithmic mean temperature 
difference, effectiveness- NTU calculations, types and des ign principles. Radiation: absorption and emission, 
black bodies, emissivity, form factors, radiation heat transfer between surfaces, radiating gases. Mass 
transfer: diffusion processes, transport analogies, Colburn j- factors, combined mass and heat transf er. 
Homework assignments in the form of self -study, tutorial problems, designs or seminars form an integral 
part of the module.  

Required Modules:  
P Fluid Mechanics 244  
P Thermodynamics A 214  



52124 High Frequency Technique  



414 (15) High-Frequency Technique (3L; 1P; 1T) 
Smith chart and applications; impedance -matching networks; amplifier design; oscillator design; high -
frequency systems; electromagnetic compatibility; electro-dynamics and radiation; wire antennas; antenna design; HF metrology.  

Required Modules:  
C Electromagnetics 344  



21350 Hydraulic Engineering  



424 (15) Storm Water Drainage and Hydraulic Structures (3L; 2,5T ) 
Storm  water hydraulics: general introduction and guidelines; design floods. Storm  water discharge:  run-off 
over land, roads, parking areas, cu rbs and inlets, storm- water pipe systems; flood attenuation ponds; canals, 
culverts and bridge damming. Hydraulic structures; sharp - and broad -crested weirs and submergence; dam 
spillways; energy dissipaters; flow control gates; side channel spillways and outlet structures. Introduction to coastal engineering and sediment transport; theory of ocean waves; wave parameters for practical 
application in coastal engineering problems; design of basic coastal protection. Application of proven 
hydraulic and coastal engineering science and techniques , using latest technologies, to design sustainable 
solutions in collaboration with stakeholders for the benefit of society.  

Required Modules:  
P Hydraulics 324  
P Hydraulics 354  



14400 Hydraulics  



324 (15) Flow Theory and Pipe Flow (3 L; 2,5T) 
Hydrostatics; pressure and pressure measurement; pressure forces on submerged bodies; flotation and buoyancy; principles of fluid flow; flow patterns; fundamental equations of fluid dynamics; application of the conservation laws to fluids; application of the energy and momentum equations; velocity and discharge 
measurement; potential flows; real and ideal fluids; behaviour of real fluids; viscous flow; stability of laminar 
flow and the onset of turbulence; shearing in turbulent flows; the boundary layer; implications of the boundary layer; cavitation; surface tension; flow in pipes and closed conduits; fundamentals of pipe flow; 
lamin ar flow; turbulent flow; local head loss; partially full pipes; pipeline systems and design; series, parallel 
and branched pipe systems; distribution systems; design of pumping mains; hydraulic machines; 
classification of machines; continuous flow pumps; p ump selection; turbines; cavitation in hydraulic 
machines; surge in pipelines; surge protection; effects of rapid valve closure; unsteady compressible flow; complex problems. 

Required Modules:  
PP Applied Mathematics B 154  
PP Engineering Mathematics 145  
P Applied Mathematics B 224  Engineering 
75 
 


354 (15) Open Channel Flow and Water Treatment (3L; 0,5P; 2T) 
Open channel flow and flow classification; uniform flow; rapidly varied flow; energy conservation; hydraulic 
jump.  Momentum principle; critical depth flow measurement; gradually varied flow; flow profile classification; 
backwater (transitional) curve calculation (direct and standard step methods); unsteady flow; waves in open channel flow. Basic water chemistry; basic  water microbiology; water quality; treatment processes (settling, 
filtration, coagulation, flocculation); principles of biological treatment; aerobic processes (activated sludge 
and biological filters); anaerobic processes; disinfection; sewer networks an d sanitation systems.  

Required Modules:  
P Hydraulics 324  



14397 Hydrology  



424 (15) Flood and Resource Hydrology (3 L; 2,5T ) 
A systematic overview of the different components of the hydrological cycle  and its applicability  in a Smart 
Engineering environment; variability of the South African climate, hydrological processes, sources of data 
and the characteristics of South African data.  The analysis of hydrological data, including probabilities, gap 
filling, regression, excee dance and non- exceedance probabilities and all other basic statistic parameters.  
Storage yield analysis: philosophy and concepts, time series, human influences on catchments, the 
adaptation of water demand for a sustainable environment , catchment models. Stochastic data. Low flow 
analysis, analysis of time series, regionalised data for South Africa and geohydrology, including artificial 
recharge . Flood design techniques (empiric, deterministic and probabilistic)  and extreme floods , including 
innovative data use, such as radar data. 

Required Modules:  
P Hydraulics 354  
P Data Analytics (Eng) 324  



31496 Industrial Engineering  



152 (6) Introduction to Industrial Engineering  (3T) 
Manufacturing and service systems, introductory production principles with applications, introductory 
optimisation, system variation, productivity measurement and analysis.   




44792 Industrial Ergonomics  



414 (15) Industrial Ergonomics (3 L; 2T) 
Operation analysis, work standards; reduction of setup times, training practices, remuneration, 
anthropometry, workstation and tool design, man/machine interfaces, work physiology and biomechanics, 
work  design , cognitive work, connecting the human to the cloud, aspects of occupational health and safety.  




53937 Industrial Management  



354 (15) Industrial Management (3 L; 3T) 
Industry dynamics and the value chain, BPR (Business Process Re- engineering); SCM (Supply Chain 
Management) and logistics management, information technology and e -commerce within the framework of 
a formal ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system.  

Required Modules:  
P Production Management 314 Engineering 
76 
 


10618 Industrial Practice  



442 (8) Management and Organisational Behaviour  (2L; 1T; 1S) 
Work and people organisation, organisational culture, motivation principles, motivation methods, building 
groups into teams, conflict management and negotiation, managing organisational change, overview of 
labour legislation, guest lectures by engineers from industry.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



47422 Industrial Programming  



244 (15) Industrial Programming (2 L; 3T) 
Use of spreadsheets: data manipulation, numerical methods, graphs, basic financial calculations, planning and analysis of scenarios and optimising. Visual Basic for Applications for spreadsheet use. Basic computer communication. Theory and application of forecasting with emphasis on spreadsheet applications.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 145  



25445 Industrial Project  



498 (30)  Industrial Project (1S) 
Independent execution of a theoretical and/or practical investigation in the field of industrial engineering, and the submission of a comprehensive report. (The project runs for the whole final year, with 30% of the 
project completed in the first semester,  and 70% in the second semester.)  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



48062 Information Systems 



414 (15) Information Systems (2 L; 1,2P; 2T) 
Techniques and resources required for the design, development and implementation of information systems; system development life cycle; entity- relationship models; data flow models; normalisation; design 
of input and output interfaces; quality assurance of the information system; system implementation; design, 
development an d implementation of an Internet -based information system in group projects.  

Required Modules:  
P Industrial Programming 244  



14213  Intercultural Communication (Eng)  



113 (8) Introduction to Intercultural Communication for Engineers (2L; 3T)  
Dimensions of culture, such as individualism and collectivism, power distance, uncertainty avoidance, and masculinity and femininity. The “ Describe -Analyse -Evaluate ” framework. Barriers to effective intercultural 
commun ication, such as stereotyping and prejudice. Writing assignments related to intercultural 
communication in the engineering context, with introduction to coherence, style and referencing. Introduction to engineering studies. Reading -skills development. Basi c skills in use of Microsoft Word and 
Excel. 

77 
 


13363 Internship  (Eng) 



392 (0) Industrial Experience  (0T) 
Students experience, or observe first -hand, typical engineering work in an appropriate industry. The work 
must be performed under the direct supervision of a n engineer from an appropriate discipline . Students are 
required to, within their discipline: apply fundamental engineering principles to solve practical problems in an 
industrial context; develop an enhanced unde rstanding of the nature, processes and challenges of industrial 
practice; and develop their technical and interpersonal skills.  
The student’ s home department’ s prior approval of the scope and nature of the work is required. The scope 
of the student’ s work  in this module should be at least 1700 hours Students are required to submit three 
reports: (a) shortly after commencing the internship, a report on the agreement between the student and 
employer, detailing the scope and nature of the work; (b) a progress  report halfway through their training; 
and (c) a final report at the end of their training. The latter two reports must explain the nature and scope of 
the work conducted, as well as the technical details of work that they experienced or observed. Referen ces 
by students’ industrial supervisors on their conduct must be submitted with these reports.  
Students are normally not allowed to register for any other undergraduate module(s) in the year that a student is registered for this module.  

Required Modules:  
PP All modules of the first two years of a 4 -year BEng  
Departmental approval  



393 (0) Industrial Experience and International Exchange (0T) 
This module  can be offered either in one or in both semesters. If it is offered in both semesters, it  comprises 
Parts 1 and 2 as described below . If it is offered in only one semester, it comprises only Part 2.  
Part 1: Students experience, or observe first -hand, typical engineering work  or research  in an appropriate 
industry or research institution  for least 600 hours. The work must be performed under the direct supervision 
of an engineer from an appropriate discipline. Students are required to, within their engineering discipline , 
apply  fundamental engineering principles to solve practical problems in an industrial context and develop 
their technical and interpersonal skills. The home department’s prior approval of the scope and nature of the 
work is required. Students are required to submit at least two reports: (a) shortly after commencing the 
internship, a report on the agreement between the student and host , detailing the scope and nature of the 
work; (b) a final report at the end of their training. The latter report must explain the nature and scope of the 
work conducted, as well as the technical details of work that they experienced or observed. References by students’ supervisors on their conduct must be submitted with these reports.  
Part 2: Students also undertake an exchange to an  engineering faculty  outside South Africa  for at least 600 
hours of participation in  projects and/or  modules. The host faculty, as well as the combination of the projects 
and modules , are subject to the prior approval of the student’ s home department  at Stellenbosch University . 
Students are normally not allowed to register for any other undergraduate module(s) at Stellenbosch University in the semester(s) that a student undertakes Internship 393, unless the modules are part of an 
exchange agreement between the Engineering Faculty and the host faculty. 

Required Modules:  
PP All modules of the first two years of a 4 -year BEng  
Departmental approval  



39705 Introductory Machine Design  



244 (15) Design Process, Machine Parts and Machine Drawing (1 L; 3P; 2T) 
Conceptual design process, human factors in design. Design for assembly. Machine parts: seals, couplings, 
keys, retaining rings and bearings. Freehand sketches, part models, 2D detail drawings of parts and part lists, 
3D modelling and interference checking. Drawing standards: measurement instrumentation for 
manufacturing, surface roughness, tolerancing, geometric tolerancing, shrink fits, welding symbols. Design of 
belt and chain drives. Working drawings and design project s in which the theory is applied. 

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Drawings 123  or P Engineering Drawings 143  
P Strength of Materials 143  Engineering 
78 
 


254 (15) Mechanics of Machines and Machine Drawing (2L; 3P; 1T)  
Modelling of mechanical systems: kinematics of planar mechanisms, velocity and acceleration diagrams, 
balancing. Machine parts: seals, couplings, keys, retaining rings and bearings. Drawing standards: 
measurement instrumentation for manufacturing, surface roughness, tolerancing, geometric tolerancing, 
shrink fits, welding symbols. Working drawings.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Drawings 123  or P Engineering Drawings 143  
P Applied Mathematic s B 224  



14212 Intro ductory Systems Eng ineering  



444 (15) Introductory Systems Engineering (3L; 3 P) 
Principles of systems engineering. System and system element requirements development. System of systems. Principles of system life cycle management. Develop ment of software to support digitalisation of 
engineered systems. Contract and intellectual property aspects of engineering practice. Public liability 
considerations in product development and production. Safety considerations and implications of the Occup ational Health and Safety Act in engineering practice.   

Required Modules:  
P Mechatronics 424  



16020 Machine Design A  



314 (15) Fatigue, Fracture Mechanics and Machine Components (2 L; 2P; 2T) 
Design for 3D  static and dynamic loads, static failure, fatigue , fracture mechanics , deflection and stiffness, 
buckling. Design for machining, metal casting, welding, forging and plastic inje ction moulding. Design 
projects where the theory is applied to the mechanical design of multi -degree- of-freedom mechatronic 
systems subject to inertial loads due to acceleration, including actuator selection, inertia matching and working drawings that cont ain multiple levels of assemblies.  

Required Modules:  
P Introductory Machine Design 254   
P Strength of Materials W 244  



16039 Machine Design B  



344 (15) Design of Machine Subsystems (2L; 2P; 2T) 
Desi gn of lead screws, bolt connections, fasteners, springs, clutches, brakes . Cam analysis and design. 
Kinematics of gear systems and forces. Gear design. Shaft connections.  Pressure vessel code design.  Design 
projects where theory is applied.  

Required Modules:  
P Machine Design A 314  Engineering 
79 
 


11745 Maintenance Management  



414 (15) Maintenance Management (3L; 0,5P; 2,5T) 
Strategic maintenance planning, plant acquisition policy, business interface, structuring of maintenance 
objectives, reliability statistics, Reliability Centred Maintenance, plant maintenance life planning and 
scheduling, preventive maintenance, top -down/b ottom -up approach, managing maintenance resources, 
maintenance organisation, human factors, maintenance team work, Total Productive Maintenance, 
maintenance systems, maintenance budgeting, maintenance control, short -term work planning, 
management of shutdowns, network analysis technique for management of shutdowns, other shutdown 
methodologies, spare -part management, maintenance management information systems.  

Required Modules:  
C Mechatronics 424  



34134 Manufacturin g Processes  



244 (15) Manufacturing Processes (2L; 1,5P; 1T) 
Mechanical properties of materials; casting processes; shaping of plastics; powder metallurgy; metal forming; bulk deformation of material; sheet metal working; principles of metal machining; machining operations and 
equipment; cutting tools for machining; economic considerations for machining; welding processes; 
mechanical assembly; non -traditional machining; additive manufacturing (3D printing) . Factory visits and 
process design projects.  

Required Modules:  
C Material Science A 244  



45381 Manufacturing Systems  



314 (15) Manufacturing Systems (2 L; 2T) 
Introduction to manufacturing systems ; sustainable manufacturing; product design;  reverse engineering; 
concurrent engineering; additive manufacturing; CNC technology; Internet of Things ( IoT) in manufacturing 
systems. 

Required Modules:  
P Manufacturing Processes 244  



30325 Material Science A  



244 (15) Materials Science A (3L; 3P) 
Metals: physical testing; dislocations and strengthening mechanisms; cold work; phase diagrams; micro -
structure; iron iron -carbide system; cooling curves; thermal processing; properties of ferrous and non -ferrous 
alloy s; fracture analysis.  Ceramics: introduction to ceramics; mechanical properties; types and application; 
advanced engineering ceramics; fireproof materials; manufacturing processes; future use of advanced 
ceramics. Polymers: classification; polymerisation; molecular structure; crystalinity; glass transition; melting 
point; elasticity; flow viscosity; creeping; yielding; morphologic changes during loading; reinforcing mechanisms; types; advanced fibre -reinforced polymers.  Corrosion: types; corrosion processes  and rate for 
metals; corrosion control and protection; corrosion -related phenomena; degradation of polymers; material 
protection. Thermal properties of materials.  Materials selection for engineering applications (project).  

80 
 


22853 Mathematical Statistics  



214 (16) Distribution Theory and Introduction to Statistical Inference (4L ; 2P)  
Continuous stochastic variables; expected value and variance of a continuous stochastic variable; important 
continuous distributions; uniform, normal, exponential, gamma, beta. Moments and moment -generating 
functions for discrete and continuous distributions. Bivariate probability distributions; marginal and 
conditional distributions; the multinomial and bivariate normal distribution; determining the distribution of 
functions of variables. The central limit theorem (without proof). Samples and sampling distributions: the 
standard parametric cases. Interval estimation and hypothesis testing: applying these principles in the standard cases of parametric inference. Data representation and description, calculating and interpreting 
sample measures.  

Required Modules:  
PP Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or PP Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
PP (Mathematics 114 or Engineering Mathematics 115 ) and  PP (Mathematics 144 or Engineering Mathematics 145 ) 
with an average final mark of at least 60% , or PP (Mathematics 214  or Engineering Mathematics 214) with a  final 
mark of at least 55%. 



245 (8) Statistical Inference (2L ; 1P)  
Introduction to statistical inference. Principles of point estimation: efficiency, minimum variance unbiased 
estimators, consistency. Method of moments estimators. Maximum likelihood estimators. The Neyman -
Pearson lemma: proof and applications. Likelihood ratio tests. Parametric estimation theory and hypothesis testing. Bayesian inferential statistics.  

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematical Statistics 214  



246 (8) Linear Models in Statistics (2L ; 1P)  
Advanced matrix algebra. Stochastic vectors and matrices. The multivariate normal distribution. Maximum 
likelihood estimation of parameters in the multivariate normal distribution.  Distributions of quadratic forms. 
The simple linear regression model. The method of least squares. Inference in the simple linear regression 
model. Introduction to R software. 

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematical Statistics 214  



312 (16) Statistical Inference and Probability T heory (3L ; 1P)  
Advanced distribution theory, sequences of random variables, limit theory for sequences, generating 
functions, sampling distributions and approximations. Sufficiency. Different approaches to inference. 
Goodness -of-fit methods. Bayes inference: Decision theory and Bayes risk using loss functions, Bayesian 
belief networks and Bayesian classification. Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation techniq ues: Gibbs 
sampling and Metropolis -Hasting algorithms.  

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematical Statistics 245  
P Mathematical Statistics 246 with a final mark of at least 40%  
P Mathematics 214  or P Engineering Mathematics 214  

316 ( 16) Regression and Predictive Modelling (3L ; 1P)  
Fitting regression models by means of matrices. The multiple linear regression model. Inference in the multiple linear regression model. Residual analysis. Variable selection techniques. Ridge regression. Lasso 
regression. Linear methods for classification . The use of R software to fit models in practice.  

Required Modules:  
PP Mathematical Statistics 246  
P Mathematical Statistics 245 with a final mark of at least 40%  
P Mathematics 214 or P Engineering Mat hematics 214 
P Mathematics 244 or P Engineering Mathematics 242  Engineering 
81 
 


344 (16) Stochastic Processes and Statistical Learning (3L; 1P)  
Introduction to stochastic processes. Markov processes and their applications. Introduction to martingale 
theory and applications. Introduction to statistical learning. 

Required Modules:  
P Mathematical Statistics 312  
P Mathematical Statistics 316  



21539 Mathematics 



186 (32) Introductory Mathematics (3 L; 3T) 
For BSc (Extended Curriculum Programme) and BEng (Extended Curriculum  Programme) students.  
To take this module, you must have a mark of at least 5 (or  60%) for Mathematics on your NSC or your IEB 
school- leaving certificate.  
An introduction to calculus, linear algebra and mathematical reasoning: different presentations of functions in 
terms of formulas, graphs, tables and stories; inverse of a function; exponential and logarithmic functions; trigonometric functions and their inverse functions; modelling with functions. Gradual progression from 
average to instantaneous rate of change; limits; basic integration. Systems of equations; analytic geometry; 
math ematical induction; binomial theorem.  




39292 Mechanical Engineering  



152 (6) An introduction to mechanical engineering (3T) 
Mechanical machines and components ; freehand drawings ; modelling of machines and components ; 
conceptual design process ; layout and assembly of a mechanical system ; basic experimental investigation.  




414 (15) Specialist Topics in Mechanical Engineering (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Topics from specialist areas in mechanical engineering, such as air-conditioning and refrigeration, aeronautical engineering, marine engineering, vehicle engineering and machine design. The exact content of 
the module is determined annually as dictated by the availability of specialist lecturers and the requirements 
of students.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



39179 Mechanical Project 



478 (45) Capstone Project for Mechanical Engineering Students (2L; 3P) 
Professional communication: written and oral project presentations, reports. Independent execution of theoretical and/or practical design and/or investigation in the field of mechanical engineering with formal oral presentations and t he submission of a final comprehensive report.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



10886 Mechatronic Engineering  



152 (6) An introduction to mechatronic engineering (3T) 
Mechanical machines and components ; freehand drawings ; modelling of machines and components ; 
conceptual design process ; layout and assembly of a mechatronic system ; basic experimental investigation . 

82 
 


56790 Mechatronic Project  



478 (45) Capstone Project for Mechatronic Engineering Students (2 L; 3P) 
Professional communication: written and oral project presentations, reports. Independent execution of 
theoretical and/or practical design and/or investigation in the field of mechatronic engineering with formal 
oral presentations and the submission of a final comprehensive report.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



488 (45) Capstone Project for Mechatronic Engineering Students (2 L; 3P) 
Professional communication: written and oral project presentations, reports. Independent execution of 
theoretical and/or practical design and/or investigation in the field of mechatronic engineering with formal 
oral presentations  and the submission of a final comprehensive report.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year enrolment  



50458 Mechatronics  



424 (15) Mechatronic Design (3L; 3P) 
Sensors, measurement accuracy and uncertainty, actuators; digital and analogue interfaces; sequential control with relay logic, PLCs and PCs. One or more projects in which mechanics, electronics, computer use and control are integrated.  
Until 2021: The st atistics of measurement and reliability (this section is  presented as a block course before 
the start of the semester).  

Required Modules:  
P Control Systems 354  



47988 Mineral Processing  



345 (15) Mine ral Processing (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Mineral growths and principles of liberation; solid state analysis; population balances; mineral liberation and 
liberation distributions; classification with sieves and hydrocyclones; empirical models; comminution; 
density-based separation equipment; surface chemistry and flotation; hydrometallurgical principles and unit 
operations;  Pourbaix diagrams; introductory mass balance reconciliation.  
[Presented by Dept Chemical Engineering, 80% of module.]  
Introduction to mineralogy. Characterisation of materials in the solid state: scanning electron microscopy with 
energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM -EDS) and wave length dispersion spectroscopy; X -ray fluorescence 
(XRF) and X -ray diffraction techniques (XRD); reflectance and transmittance microscopic techniques and 
image analysis; microscopic techniques based on polarised light and etched materials, sample preparation for solid state characterisation and spectroscopic techniques. Laser ablation, glow discharge and spark 
discharge optical emission spectra.  
[Presented by Dept Earth Sciences, 20% of module.]  

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 254  
P Particle Technology 316  Engineering 
83 
 


415 (15) Materials Extraction and Selection  (3L; 2T) 
Process metallurgy of natural raw materials and secondary materials: applied phase and reaction equilibrium 
thermodynamics relevant to solid and liquid solutions, molten alloys, slag and matte melts. Processing 
methods relate d to high temperature reactions and related extraction techniques in pyrometallurgy to obtain 
metals, alloys and solutions containing metallic species , with consideration of thermodynamics. Extraction of 
metals from ferrous oxides and sulphides with regard to selection and characterisation of pyrometallurgical reactors, including refractory materials at high temperatures. Materials in chemical en gineering with 
reference to structure, properties and behaviour of metals, ceramics, composites and polymers. Selection of 
materials for chemical engineering applications with consideration of prediction and prevention of failure and 
corrosion.  

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 317  



56804 Modelling  



334 (18) Modelling and Simulation of Mechanical Systems (4 L; 1P; 2 T) 
Formulation of differential equations  for mechanical, electrical, thermal and fluid systems, solutions using 
Laplace transforms, block diagrams and transfer functions; state space formulation. Transient and stationary 
behaviour; frequency response analysis.  Design of a laboratory experiment.  
The statistics of measurement and reliability, expected values, distributions and probability density functions; 
operations and transformation of random variables; programming with R.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  
P Engineering Mathematics 242  



53678 Numerical Fluid Dynamics  



414 (15) Numerical Fluid Dynamics (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Modelling of flow: elements of numerical flow software, conservation laws and differential equations for 
mass, momentum and energy, boundary conditions, equation of state, grid types and generation, 
linearisation, discretisation, false diffusion, SIMPLE pressure  correction algorithm, stability, relaxation factors, 
source term linearisation, error calculations, convergence, use of commercial codes; course project.  

Required Modules:  
P Thermofluid Dynamics 344  



36323 Numerical Methods  



262 (8) Numerical Methods  (2L; 1T) 
Introduction to MATLAB; zeros of functions; solving of systems of linear equations; numerical differentiation and integration; interpolation and curve -fitting; numerical methods for solving ordinary and  partial differential 
equations. 

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  Engineering 
84 
 


59528 Operations Research (Eng)  



345 (15) Operations Research (Deterministic Models) (3L; 3T) 
The systems approach to problem- solving; problems leading to linear programming, network, integer and 
non- linear programming models; algorithms for solving such models; tasks, including exercises with 
computer packages.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  



415 (15) Operations Research (Stochastic Models) (3 L; 3T) 
Analysis of problems leading to a selection of  deterministic and stochastic dynamic programming models , 
Markov chains and waiting- line models; techniques for solving su ch models; decisions under uncertainty; 
Bayes’ theorem; multi -criteria decision -making ; local -search and population -based metaheuristics.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Statistics 314  or P Probability Theory and S tatistics 114  



14020 Optimisation (Eng)  



414 (15) Non-linear Optimisation (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T)  
Local vs . global optima, classification of stationary points, the Karush -Kuhn- Tucker conditions, Lagrangian 
relaxation. Numerical methods: g radient -based methods, the Broyden -Fletcher -Goldfarb -Shanno algorithm, 
the simplex algorithm, the Nelder -Mead algorithm. Metaheuristic methods: t rajectory based methods (tabu 
search and simulated annealing), evolutionary algorithms (genetic algorithms and  differential evolution), 
swarm intelligence (ant colony optimisation and  particle swarm optimisation).  

Required Modules:  
P Operations Research (Eng) 345  
P Computer Science E 214  



47902 Particle Technology  



316 (15) Particle Technology (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Characteristics  and mathematical description of particles and their size distributions; determination of the 
particular characteristics of single particles and powders; the mechanical behaviour and flow patterns of 
particle systems; sedimentation and thickener design; flow through packed beds; fluidisation and fluidised 
bed behaviour of particles; hydraulic and pneumatic transport of particles; filtration; gas cyclones; health and 
safety aspects of fine powders.  

Required Modules:  
P Chemical Engineering 254  
P Chemical Engineering 264  Engineering 
85 
 


65609 Philosophy and Ethics  



314 (4 ) Philosophy and Ethics  (3L) 
Applied ethics; the code of conduct for professional persons of the Engineering Council of SA (ECSA); case 
studies of typical situations from engineering practice, including the social, workplace and physical 
environments. 
Offered for one  term in the semester.  
The quality assurance of Philosophy and Ethics is handled jointly by the Department of Philosophy and the 
Faculty of Engi neering.  Consult the module framework for further information.  




414 (4) Philosophy and Ethics  (3L) 
Applied ethics; the code of conduct for professional persons of the Engineering Council of SA (ECSA); case 
studies of typical situ ations from engineering practice, including the social, workplace and physical 
environments . 
Offered for the one term in the semester.  
The quality assurance of Philosophy and Ethics is handled jointly by the Department of Philosophy and the Faculty of Eng ineering.  Consult the module framework for further information.  




12998 Physics  



176 (32) Preparatory Physics (3L; 3P) 
Students follow this module in the BSc (Extended Curriculum Programme s) in AgriSciences and  Science and 
for the BEng . The module focuses on the nature of physics with the following themes as content: mechanics, 
electromagnetism, modern physics.  




40142 Practical Workshop Training  



211 (0) Practical Workshop Training 
After their first year o f study, students receive training in workshop practice at a workshop appointed by the 
University. Students may complete such training at other institutions that have suitable facilities and staff, provided that prior written permission is obtained from th e relevant departmental chair. Such permission 
must be obtained prior to the commencement of the module.  

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



241 (0) Practical Workshop Training 
Students receive, after th eir first study year, training in workshop practice in a workshop appointed by the 
University. Students may complete such training at other organisations which have the necessary facilities and personnel, provided that written permission is obtained from the relevant departmental chair. Such 
permission must be obtained prior to the commencement of the module. 

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



12201 Prepa ratory Technical Drawings  



146 (16) Prepa ratory Technical Drawings  (3L; 3P) 
Principles of first - and third -angle projection. Linework and lettering. Isometric projections and drawings. 
Drawing layouts. Full section  views. Geometric constructions and  tangency. True lengths and auxiliary views. 
Introduction to descriptive geometry: points and lines in space; new projection planes. Introduction to 
parametric geometric modelling in computer- aided design (CAD).  

86 
 


56820 Probability Theory and Statistics  



114 (16) Probability Theory and Statistics (3L ; 3T)  
Combinatorial analysis; the basic counting principles; permutations and combinations. Random phenomena; 
sample spaces and events; the probability axioms; the probability of an event; random s election; probability 
rules; conditional probability; the rule of Bayes; stochastic independence. Discrete and continuous stochastic 
variables; expected value and variance of a stochastic variable; important discrete distributions: binomial, 
Poisson, geometric, hyper -geometric, negative binomial; important continuous distributions : uniform, 
exponential, normal. 
Please note:  This module is identical to Probability Theory and Statistics 


144(16), which is offered in the 
second semester by the Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science for BCom students.  




23256 Production Management  



212 (8) Production and Operational Management (2L; 2T) 
Introduction to operation s management ; strategy and sustainability ; process analysis  and manufacturing 
processes; lean supply chains; sales and operations  planning; material s requirements planning (dependent 
inventory ). 




314 (15) Operations Facilities and Management (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Process analysis and improvement by combining Lean and Theory of Constraints approaches; facility design  
with regard to facility location, facility layout and production line design ; demand forecasting and capacity 
planning; integrated production planning from an aggregate to operational level ; inventory planning and 
control; scheduling, execution and control of production .  

Required Modules:  
P Production Management 212  
C Engineering Statistics 314  



444 (12) Financial and Production Management (3L; 2T) 
Introduction to operations management, productivity and competitiveness; the funds flow cycle and the accounting equation; process flow analysis; cost accounting; quality management and statistical process 
control; budgets and capital expenditure including discounted cash flow techniques; inflation and tax; just- in-
time management (JIT), th eory of constraints scheduling (TOC); inventory control and MRP; supply chain 
management (SCM).  




30279 Project (Civil  Engineering) 



418 (30)  Project (Civil) (1L; 20P ) 
Each student must complete an approved design or research project  during the final year, after which a 
comprehensive report on the project is submitted. The project must be of an investigative nature and the ability of the student to work independently will be assessed. Each student will deliver an oral and poster 
presentation on the project. This module may be done only instead of Project (Civil) 458 in the semester that 
the students can complete their programme. 

Required Modules:  
Departmental approval  



458 (30)  Projec t (Civil) (1L; 20P ) 
Each student must complete an approved design or research project  during their final year, after which a  
comprehensive report on the project is submitted. The project must be of an investigative nature and the 
ability of the student to work independently will be assessed. Each student will deliver an oral and poster presentation on the project.  

Required Modules:  
Departmental approval  Engineering 
87 
 


46795 Project (E)  



448 (45) Project (E) (20P) 
Thesis project: Each student must do an independent project on an approved topic and submit a full report. 
An oral examination is required where the professional communication skill s of each student is assessed.  

Required Modules:  
Final -year Enrolment  



51993 Project Management  



412 (12) Project Management (3 L; 1T) 
Project management framework: integration, scope, time, cost, human resources, communication, risk, safety and procurement. Project management processes:  initiating, planning, execution, control and commissioning.  
Principles of business management and leader ship. Multidisciplinary teamwork and project management.  




46167 Quality Assurance  



344 (15) Quality Assurance (2L; 3T) 
Definition of quality, methods and techniques of quality assurance, statistical process design, sampling. 
Principles of robust design. Formulation of measures of system performance and quality. Identification of 
quality noise factors. Formulation and implementation of techniques to reduce effects of noise. Synthesis 
and selection of design concepts for robustness.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Statistics 314  



59471 Quality Management  



444 (15) Quality Management (3 L; 3T) 
Definition of reliability and maintainability; reliability management; methods and techniques for reliability modelling, data analysis, prediction and maintainability assurance; quality management; methods and 
techniques for qu ality management; quality improvement; quality planning; quality control; leadership for 
quality management ; cost of (poor) quality. 

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Statistics 314  



64866 Scientific Communication Ski lls 



116 (12) Scientific Communication Skills (3L; 3T) 
For students in the BSc (Extended Curriculum  Programme s). This module focuses on the development of 
speaking, listening, and reading skills in the academic environment in general and specifically in the natural sciences. Aspects such as engaging with and understanding relevant academic and natural science texts, understanding text components, the use of fluent, correct and proper language, and the interpretation of 
graphic data, will be addressed.  




146 (6) Scientific Communication Skills  (3L) 
For BSc students in the BSc (Extended Curriculum  Programme s). This module focuses on the development 
of writing skills in the academic environment in general and spe cifically in the natural sciences. Aspects such 
as engaging with and understanding relevant academic and natural science texts, understanding text 
components, presenting data in an edited and coherent text, the use of correct and proper language, the Engineering 
88 
 emplo yment of accurate language, correct referencing technique and using graphics to clarify data will be 
addressed. 




53945 Simulation  



442 (12) Simulation  (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Principles of discrete -event simulation of stochastic processes; generation of random numbers and values 
for random variables; Monte -Carlo principle; simulation methodology; concept models; theory, techniques 
and resources required for the analysis of input- and output data of simulation models; applications with a 
software package.  
Required Modules:  
PP Engineering Statistics 314  



19712 Strength of Materials  



143 (12) Introduction: Mechanics of Deformable Bodies (3 L; 2T) 
Introduction to mechanics, internal forces and stresses, deformations and strain, material response: material 
law, axially loaded elements, torsion elements with circular cross section, symmetrical ben ding of beams, 
thin walled pressure vessels.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Mathematics 115  
C Applied Mathematics B 124  



224 (15) Stress Analysis (3 L; 2,5T ) 
Stress and strain analysis; relation between stress and strain for materials; transformation of stress and strain, 
principal stress and principal strain; elastic and plastic material behaviour for axially loaded members, stability of axially loaded members (Euler theory), torsion, bending and skew bending elements w ith solid 
and thin- walled sections; shear stress in bending; composite stress – axial, torsion, shear and bending; stress 
concentrations, failure theories and fatigue; elastic design of members.  

Required Modules:  
P Strength of Materials 143  



254 (15) Structural Analysis (3 L; 2,5T) 
Theory and application of classic structural analysis techniques. E nergy methods and virtual work. Flexibility, 
stiffness and matrix methods. Equilibrium, reactions and section forces in structures with axial, torsional and bending members.  Linear elastic constitutive relation and differential equations for strain and displacement.  

Required Modules:  
P Strength of Materials 224  



19739 Strength of Materials W 



244 (15) Displacements, Failure Criteria, Stress and Strain Transformations (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Displacements and deflection of beams. Energy methods. Stress and strain transformations. Mohr circles. Von Mises, Tresca and  Mohr -Coulomb failure theories. The relationship between stress and strain and the 
application to thick -walled cylinders, curved beams, press and shrink fits, rotating discs and rings, etc. 
Experimental stress analysis using strain gauges.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 214  
P Strength of Materials 224  Engineering 
89 
 


334 (15) Strength of  Materials (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
Complex strains and stresses; generalised Hook’s law, anisotropic materials (composites); failure criterions; 
introduction to plasticity; fracture mechanics (stress singularities); time dependent failure (material creep); 
non- destructive testing (NDT) and failure analysis.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mat hematics 214  
P Engineering Mathematics 242  
P Strength of Materials W 244  



36307 Structural Design  



354 (15) Concrete Construction (3L; 2,5T ) 
Conceptual understanding of reinforced concrete structures: limit states approach and loads according to 
the relevant design codes of practice (gravitational loads). Material behaviour of concrete (shrinkage, creep 
and applications according to the relevant codes of practice). Short column analysis:  stresses, areas of steel 
and concrete, basic detailing. Slender colum ns (uni -axial and bi- axial bending).  Beam analysis:  bending, 
redistribution of moments, shear forces, basic detailing, displacement control (L/d ratio according to design codes of practice). Slab design: beam and slab with application of tables in codes of  practice, flat slab design 
and punching shear, basic detailing.  Simplified frames as allowed by codes of practice (application of 
commercial frame analysis software packages).  Introduction to pre -stressed concrete (statically determinate 
beams): choice of  tendon force and tendon profile, losses, details (anchor zone). Anchorage of reinforcement: 
laps and bond of reinforced concrete. Furthermore, continuously as part of the above:  quality control during 
design and construction, specifications, representatio n of a physical structure by theoretical modelling.  

Required Modules:  
C Building Materials 254  
P Strength of Materials 254  



424 (15) Steel Construction (3 L; 2,5T ) 
Description of the basis of design. Determination of structural loading according to the relevant code of 
practice: review of general prescriptions, focus on wind loading as applied to steel structures. Conceptual 
design of steel structures. Determination of the response of steel structures in terms of function, stability and 
load effects (element forces and deflections). Determination of the function, response and capacity of structural steel elements, tension elements, compression elements, beams, beam -columns, connections 
and foot plates i n terms of the relevant code of practice. Design of basic steel structure.  

Required Modules:  
P Strength of Materials 254  
C Structural Design 354  



46779 Systems and Signals  



214 (15) Introduction to Systems and Signals (3L; 1P; 2T) 
Sinusoidal steady- state analysis; phasors; sinusoidal power and energy concepts; transient and phasor 
analysis of second- order RLC circuits; instantaneous  and average power; ideal operational amplifiers; two -
port parameters.  

Required Modules:  
C Electrotechnique  143 Engineering 
90 
 


244 (15) Frequency Domain Techniques (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T) 
The Laplace transform and its application to dynamic circuits;  impulse and step response; convolution;  
transfer functions; Bode plots;  basic passive filters; basic active filters; Fourier series  and its application to 
circuits ; Fourier transform and its applications to circuits; filters.  

Required Modules:  
C Electrotechnique 143  
C Engineering Mathematics 214 
C Engineering Mathematics 242  



315 (15) Signal Theory and Analogue Modulation (3L; 1,5P; 1,5T) 
Time/frequency transformations as underlying principle; the Fourier transform and the discrete Fourier 
transform (DFT); LTI systems; modulation as building block for telecommunication systems; application of transforms in AM, SSB, FM, FDM and TDM; (de)modulation circuits with theoretical verification.  
Home Department : Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
Required Modules:  
C Systems and Signals 214  
C Systems and Signals 244  



344 (15) Stochastic Signals (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
One - and multi -dimensional random variables; expected values, moments, distribution functions and 
probability density functions; operations on and transformations of random variables; random signals, auto - 
and cross -correlation, stationary and spectral characteristics; behaviour with linear systems.  

Required Modules:  
C Systems and Signals 315  



414 (15) Digital Signal Processing (3 L; 1P; 1T) 
Sampling and time/frequency duality; Fourier transforms and series of discrete -time signals, the discrete 
Fourier transform (DFT), the fast Fourier transform (FFT), convolution by means of the FFT; describing and 
characterising discrete -time systems using the z- transform, impulse responses, frequency responses; 
difference equations; elementary filters, FIR and IIR filter design; using auto -correlations and cross -
correlations.  

Required Modules:  
C Systems and Signals 344  



14215  Technical Communication  



311 (4) Technical Communication (2L) 
Effective communication in a professional environment, specifically in the form of technical reports and 
correspondence . Text skills, such as coherence, appropriate style and structure . Appropriate referencing 
methods . Appropriate assimilation of information from various sources of knowledge to create a lit erature 
review. P resentation skills.  
Offered  for half of the semester in tandem with Philosophy and Ethics 314  




20419 Telecommunication  



414 (15) Introduction to Telecommunications (3 L; 1P; 1T) 
Channel capacity; baseband data transmission: intersymbol interference and error probabilities; signal -to-
noise ratios; probability of error for digital modulation schemes (ASK, PSK, FSK); digital transmission of 
analogue signals (PCM) and quantisation noise; forward error correction codes.  

Required Modules:  
C Systems and Signals 344  Engineering 
91 
 


19984 Theory of Structures  



354 (15) Implementation of the Finite Element Method (3 L; 2,5T ) 
Computer implementation of the finite element method for structural components, membranes, thin plates 
and frames.  Building information models (BIM) for digital twinning in construction.   

Required Modules:  
P Strength of Materials 254  
P Engineering Informatics 314  



33863 Thermodynamics A  



214 (15) Applied Thermodynamics A (3 L; 3T) 
Specific heat, C p and C v; vapours; gas -vapour mixtures, saturation; use of steam tables, phase diagrams; ideal 
and non- ideal gases; compressibility charts, improvements to the state equation; mass balances (steady and 
unsteady); energy, mechanical work, first law of thermodynamics; applications to closed and open systems: processes and cycles; method of problem solving; state changes for ideal gases; isochoric, isobaric, 
isotherm al, adiabatic and polytropic changes; enthalpy and technical work; entropy and the second law; 
temperature -entropy diagram; maximum available energy. Applications of thermodynamics; technical cycle 
processes; power generation; cooling cycles.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 145  
C Applied Mathematics B 154  
P Engineering Chemistry 123  or P Engineering Chemistry 143  



224 (15) Applied Chemical Thermodynamics A (3 L; 1P; 2,5T) 
1 Practical per semester  
Specific heat, C p and C v; vapours; gas -vapour mixtures, saturation; use of steam tables and phase diagrams; 
ideal and non -ideal gases; compressibility charts; inter- molecular forces and potential functions; basic 
equations of state; energy, mechanical  work and first law of thermodynamics; applications to closed and 
open systems; state changes for ideal gases; isochoric, isobaric, isotherm al, adiabatic and polytropic 
changes; enthalpy and technical work; entropy and the second law; temperature entropy diagram; maximum available energy; irreversible processes; basic cycles and refrigeration.  

Required Modules:  
P Engineering Mathematics 145  
C Applied Mathematics B 154  
P Engineering Chemistry 123  or P Engineering Chemistry 143  



59544 Thermofluid Dynamics  



214 (15) Introductory Thermofluid Dynamics (3L; 3P) 
Engineering approach to problem solving; thermodynamic properties of water and an ideal gas; conservation 
of mass, momentum and energy; entropy;  thermodynamic processes in closed and open systems; ideal 
thermodynamics cycles; pump and pipe systems; fans; ducts; steady conduction, convection and radiation 
heat transfer; air- vapour mixtures and air- conditioning processes.  

Required Modules:  
C Engineering Chemistry 123  or C Engineering Chemistry 143  
C Engineering Mathematics 145  Engineering 
92 
 


344 (15) Thermodynamics and Fluid Dynamics (3 L; 1P; 2T) 
External flow: introduction to fluid flow over bodies; Reynolds number and geometric effects; momentum -
integral approach; boundary layer equations: flat plate with and without pressure gradients; lift and drag 
forces. Compressible flow: compressibility and the Mach number; stagnation conditions; isentropic flow; flow 
with heat addition and with friction; shock wave phenomena; the application of compressible flow; the effect of area change. Introduction to turbomachinery, pumps, axial fans; compressible flow through fluid 
machinery, dimensional analysis; rothalpy; centrifugal and axial compressors; gas turbines; steam turbines. 
Introduction to Numerical Fluid Dynamics (NFD).  

Required Modules:  
P Thermodynamics A 214  
P Fluid Mechanics 244  



21040 Transport Science  



324 (15) Transportation Engineering (3 L; 1P; 1,5 T) 
Traffic flow theory: travel patterns, traffic flow variables and their relationships (speed, volume, travel time, delay). Urban transport networks: network development, road classification , access management  and 
universal accessibility.  Traffic engineering: speed studies, parking, capacity and l evel of service, intersection 
control. Transportation planning: stakeholders, travel demand forecasting. T raffic impact assessments. Public 
transport: modes and intermodal transport, operational planning. Transport economics: evaluation of 
projects, user pricing and payment.  

Required Modules:  
C Civil  Engineering 224  



364 (15) Transportation Engineering (3L; 1P; 1,5T) 
Road geometric design: human factors and vehicle movements, movement equations ; alignment design ; 
route determination ; parking design; intersection design; international standards. Transport safety; safety 
standards ; forgiving road ; safe systems approach. Sustainability: transport justice ; sustainable transport ; 
public transport and mini- bus taxis. Non- motorised traffic; NMT facilities . Smart E ngineering:  ITS applications ; 
infrastructure ; communications ; trends. Rail transport . Traffic analysis using floating car d ata; data 
visualisation.  

Required Modules:  
P Civil Engineering 224  
P Data Analytics (Eng) 324  
P Transport Science 324  
PP Applied Mathematics B 154  



434 (15) Pavement Design (3 L; 1P; 1,5T) 
Overview of pavements; elastic layer theory; stresses and strain development ; behaviour of granular, 
asphaltic and cementitious materials , as well as transfer functions . Alternative pavemen t design methods 
including CBR design, mechanistic design and low- volume road design. Flexible and rigid pavements . 
Sustainability: environmental influences; designing for climate change; use of recycled and secondary materials.  Construction, rehabilitatio n and maintenance . Present worth of costs for roads. 

Required Modules:  
P Transport Science 324  



64007 University Practice in the Natural Sciences  



176 (8) University Practice in the Natural Sciences  (3L) 
Study load: 78 lectures in total, presented as 5L per week in the first semester and 1L per week in the second 
semester.  
For students in the BSc (Extended Curriculum Programme s). It is followed up during the second semester in 
the different subject- specific modules of Mathematics 176, Physics 176 , Chemistry 176 and Biology 146. Basic 
terminology and concepts are addressed. Study and life skills receive attention. The natural sciences and 
specifically the subjects taken by the students serve as a context.  

93 
 


40150 Vacation Training  



241 (0) Vacation Training (Civil)  
A block of a minimum of four weeks’ vacation training must be completed. A report, complying with the 
Department’s requirements, must be submitted as examination script. The student must make his/her  own 
arrangements for vacation training. The Department is willing to assist with the arrangements. Students that do not succeed in arranging vacation work must, before the particular holiday, formulate a project of 
equivalent scope and submit it to the Chair of the Department for approval. Vacation Training 241 may be done  at any time after the commencement of the second academic year, but students may only submit a 
report from the commencement of the third year of study. 

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



341 (0) Vacation Training (Mechanical and Mechatronic)  
Students must complete at least four uninterrupted w eeks, or six weeks with no more than one interruption 
of up to four weeks, of vacation training on which a report that complies with the Department’s requirements 
is submitted as examination script. Students must make their own arrangements for vacation training. The 
Department is prepared to assist them in this regard. In cases where employment cannot be found, st udents 
must formulate a project of equivalent scope and submit it to the Chair of the Department for approval. 
Vacation Training 341 may be done  at any time after commencement of the second year of study, but 
students may only submit a report from the commencement of the third year of study .  

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



342 (0) Vacation Training (Civil)  
A block of a minimum of four weeks’ vacation training must be completed. A report, complying with the 
Department’s requirements, must be submitted as examination script. The student must make his/her  own 
arrangements for vacation training. The Department is willing to assist with the arrangements. Students that do not succeed in arranging vacation work must, before the particular holiday, formulate a project of equivalent scope and submit it to the Chair of the Department for approval. Vacation Training 342 may be 
done at any time after the commencement of the second academic year, but students may only submit a 
report from the commencement of the fourth year of study. 

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



351 (0) Vacation Training (Industrial)  
A period of at least three weeks of vacation training must be completed, supported by a report in 
accordance with departmental requirements. The report will be subject to examination. While students are 
expected to arrange their own vacation employment, the Department is prepared to provide assistance in 
this regard. In cases where employment cannot be found, students are required to complete a project or 
task as agreed upon with the Chair of the Department.  Vacation training (Industrial) 351 may be completed at 
any time after the start of the second academic year of study. Students may also apply for permission to do a single session of vacation training. This session must be of at least six weeks duration ( uninterrupted), and a 
single report is required which must cover the complete session. This alternative allows the student to 
complete Vacation Training 351 (Industrial) as well as Vacation Training 451 (Industrial) simultaneously, and 
may be done  at any time after the start of the third academic year. 

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



361 (0) Vacation Training (Chemical)  
At least six weeks’ vacation training should be done in total, of which at least three weeks must be uninterrupted. Preferably the students should do work in the chemical and mineral process industries and 
gain exposure to the large -scale equipment used in  industry which is not available at the University. The 
work should be of engineering or scientific nature, and preferably be done under the guidance of a graduate 
chemical or metallurgical engineer.  

Method of Assessment: Attendance  Engineering 
94 
 


441 (0) Vacation Training (Mechanical and Mechatronic)  
The same particulars as Vacation Training 341, except that Vacation Training 441 can be completed any time 
after the start of the third academic year, but students may only submit a report from the commencement of 
the fourth year of study.  

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



451 (0) Vacation Training (Industrial)  
Refer to Vacation Training (Industrial) 351 for details. Vacation Training (Industrial) 451 may be completed at any time after the start of the third academic year of study, but students may only submit a report from the commencement of the fourth year of study.  

Method of Assessment: Attendance  



23477 Vibration and Noise  



354 (12) Vibration and Noise of Mechanical Systems (3L;  1P; 1T) 
Vibration of systems with a single degree of freedom: formulation of mathematical models, free and forced vibration of undamped and damped systems. Systems with two and more degrees of freedom: natural frequencies and modes of undamped systems, free and forced vibrations, and frequency response 
functions. Vibration of continuous systems. Control of vibration: balancing, isolation, absorbers, and vibration 
measurement. Vibration monitoring for maintenance purposes.  Fundamentals of sound and noise; measuring 
and standards of industrial noise; influence of noise on the environment. The control of noise by damping 
and shielding.  

Required Modules:  
P Applied Mathematics B 224  
P Modelling 334  



13184 Water Treatment  



324 (15) Fundamentals of wastewater treatment (3 L; 2,5T) 
Objectives of wastewater treatment; wastewater laboratory testing methods; physical characterisation, 
settleable, non -settleable and dissolved constituents; primary sedimentation; unit operations,  biodegradable 
and unbiodegradable organics, biological growth and death behaviour; biological process kinetic equations; the steady state activated sludge model; oxygen demand and sludge production.  
Home department: Civil Engineering  
Required modules:  
PP Engineering Chemistry 123 or PP Engineering Chemistry 143 
P Engineering Mathematics 115  
C Hydraulics 324  
 
  