Economic and Management Sciences 
195 
 3. Undergraduate subjects, modules and module 
contents  
The undergraduate subjects with their accompanying modules, credits , module subjects, teaching loads and 
module content are presented below in  alphabetical  order according to subject area within the following 
groups: departments, schools, centres, faculties. 
Department of African Languages (Faculty of Arts and Social 
Scie nces)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the  Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences. 


Subject: 49638 Basic Xhosa   


Special provisions for taking Basic Xhosa  
1.  Students who have passed Xhosa for the matriculation or other equivalent examination may not follow 
Basic Xhosa for degree purposes.  
2.  No previous knowledge of Xhosa is required.  
3.  Basic Xhosa normally does not lead to continuation of Xhosa in the second year, but in exceptional circumstances the Department may grant permission for such study in the second year.  
4.  Basic Xhosa may not be taken as a separate course in addition to Xhosa 178 for degree purposes. 
5.  Basic Xhosa 114 is a prerequisite for Basic Xhosa 144.  
6.  Basic Xhosa 174 is aimed at staff and students from other faculties, as well as the general public, who are 
unable to attend regular classes but wish to learn Xhosa at a basic level. It is offered after -hours over the 
course of the full academic year.  



114 (12) Introduction to Communication in Xhosa (3L, 1T)  
The classification of the African language s of South Africa;  
The communication skills of speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing in a socio -cultural 
context;  
Cultural perspectives and language -related cultural conventions relevant to basic communication in Xhosa;  
The grammar of Xhosa relevant to the learning of basic communication skills.  
Home department: African Languages  



144 (12)  Introduction to Communication in Xhosa (3L, 1T) 
The communication skills of speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing in socio -cultural context;  
Cultural perspectives and language -related cultural conventions relevant to basic communication in Xhosa;  
The grammar of Xhosa relevant to the learning of basic communication skills.  
Prerequisite module: Basic Xhosa 114  
Home department: African Languages  Economic and Management Sciences 
196 
 

Subject: 21687 Xhosa  


Special provisions for taking Xhosa  
The modules (Xhosa 178, 214, 244, 318, 348)  constitute the contents for students who did not pass Xhosa or 
Zulu first language for the matriculation examination (that is, the non -mother -tongue stream), while the 
modules that follow below (Xhosa 188, 224, 254, 328 and 358) constitute the contents for students who have 
a first -language communication proficiency in Xhosa or Zulu.  



178 (24)  Introduction to Xhosa Language and Culture (3L, 1T)  
Classification of the African languages  
Language policy and language planning for the African languages;  The com munication skills of speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing in socio -cultural 
contexts;  
Cultural perspectives and language -related cultural conventions relevant to basic communication in Xhosa;  
Xhosa grammar relevant to acquiring communication skills in Xhosa  
Introduction to the linguistics of Xhosa;  
Introduction to communication in authentic prescribed texts from the printed media (newspaper, magazine);  Introduction to the literature of Xhosa.  
Notes 
1. Students who have passed Xhosa or Zulu First Language for the matriculation examination or an 
equivalent examination may not take Xhosa 178 for degree purposes but can take Xhosa 188.  
2. No previous knowledge of Xhosa is required.  
Home department: African Languages  



188 (24)  Introduction to Xhosa Language, Communication and Culture (3L, 1T) 
Classification of the African languages;  
Language planning and language policy for the African languages;  
Xhosa language and culture with regard to authentic spoken and written texts (e.g. printed media: 
newspaper, magazine) and visual media (television); 
Communication in Xhosa in a range of communication contexts;  
Xhosa literature: a choice of genres; Xhosa linguistics.  
Note:  Xhosa 188 requires a first -language communicative proficiency in Xhosa or Zulu.  
Home department: African Languages  
Department of Afrikaans and Dutch (Faculty of Arts and Social 
Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 39373 Afrikaans and Dutch   





178(24)  Introductory Studies in Afrikaans Language and Literature (3L, 2P)  
The module comprises the following components:  
• Afrikaans language proficiency  
• Introduction to Afrikaans language studies  
• Introduction to Afrikaans literature  
• Introduction to Dutch 
Home department: Afrikaans and Dutch  Economic and Management Sciences 
197 
 Dep artment of Agricultural Economics (Faculty of AgriSciences)   
Note:  For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of AgriScience s, see the Yearbook  
part for the Faculty of AgriSciences.  


Subject: 15504 Agricultural Economics   





234 (16) South African Agriculture (6L)  
An overview of the structure of the agricultural sector with regard to production and resource use; analysing 
the roles of agriculture, the institutional framework for agriculture, and the international context. History of 
agricultural policy; marketing and prices.  
Home department: Agricultural Economics  



242 (8) Agricultural Production Economics and Methods of Financial Analys is (2L, 1T)  
Production relations; optimising in factor -product, factor -factor, and product-product relations; cost relations; 
income, costs and margins in farming; cost accounting; economic and financial criteria; budgets.  
Prerequisite module: Economics 11 4 
Home department: Agricultural Economics  



262 (8) The Economics of Agricultural Resources (3L)  
Basic concepts; determinants of the demand, supply and value of natural resources; resources and technology; the influence of location on land use; industry-spec ific factors. 
Home department: Agricultural Economics  



314 (16) Farm Management (4L, 2T) 
Approaches to management; entrepreneurship; strategic and operational decision -making; management 
functions; management information and systems; capital requirements of  a farming operation and credit 
sources; financing policy. Analysis of problems in respect of estate planning, inheritance and taxation (capital transfer tax and income tax) in agriculture. The communication process, communication channels.  
Prerequisite mo dule: Agricultural Economics 242  
Home department: Agricultural Economics  



334 (16) Agricultural and Food Marketing (3L, 3P)  
This module is designed to introduce a comprehensive and balanced treatment of food marketing systems. It blends marketing and econom ic theory with real- world analytical tools in order to assist students in better 
understanding the food system and making profitable marketing decisions.  
Home department: Agricultural Economics  



354 (16) Agricultural Policy in the South African Context (3L)  
Investigation of priority policy issues in South African agriculture; the influence on South Africa of the 
Agreement on Agriculture and subsequent attempts to order international trade in agricultural products; 
changes in the structure of food supply chai ns and the globalisation of food trade; BEE and transformation in 
South African agriculture; the linkages of agriculture to the rest of the economy.  
Home department: Agricultural Economics  



364 (16) Farm Planning and Decision -making (4L, 2T)  
Creative problem- solving; framework for analysing farm decision -making; information processing and human 
judgement; approaches to decision -making under conditions of risk and uncertainty; tools and techniques for 
farm planning and decision -making; linear programming applications; deficiencies in the linear programming 
algorithm and the introduction of alternative programming techniques; case studies.  
Prerequisite module: Agricultural Economics 242  
Home department: Agricultural Economics  Economic and Management Sciences 
198 
 Department of Ancien t Studies (Faculty of Arts and Social 
Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 15644 Latin   





178 (24)  Latin Grammar and Literature for Beginners (3L,  1P, 1T)  
Introductory Latin grammar and literature.  
Cultural background.  
Home department: Ancient Studies 
Department of Business Management   


Subject: 48550 Business Management   





113 (12) Business Management (3L, 1P)  
Procedures for the establishment of a new business, the business environment, business ethics, competition, 
idea generation and entrepreneurship, choice of form of business, determining break -even levels, resources 
and people involved in the business, management and managerial resources.  
Home department: Business Management  



142 (6) The Investment De cision (1.5L, 1P)  
The investment cycle; the role and functioning of the JSE Securities Exchange SA; investment risks; factors 
that influence share prices; fundamental and technical analysis of companies.  
Home department: Business Management  


Subject: 58335 Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management   





214 (16) Introduction to Entrepreneurship (4L)  
Introduction to the world of entrepreneurship in South Africa; drivers of entrepreneurship; introduction to the identification of opportunities and development of ideas; the analysis of the entrepreneurial process; 
feasibility analysis; building a new venture team; assessing a new venture’s financial strength and viability; 
ethics and legal considerations; getting f inance; the importance of intellectual property; the importance of 
growth; growth strategies; buying an existing business.  
Corequisite module: Business Management 113  
Home department: Business Management  



244 (16) Small Business Management (4L)  
The scope an d nature of small business development in South Africa; the important role of SMMEs in the 
South African economy; management of entrepreneurial opportunities; small business marketing management, purchasing, manufacturing and financial management; alternat ive routes to entrepreneurship; 
financing of opportunities in the market environment; management of growth of the small business; legal 
requirements which small businesses must adhere to; E -commerce and the entrepreneur; compilation of the 
business plan wi th the emphasis on the layout; different elements of the plan, balance sheet, income 
statement and cash flow statement; broad- based black economic empowerment and opportunities for 
SMMEs. 
Corequisite module: Business Management 113  
Prerequisite module: Ent repreneurship and Innovation Management 214  
Home department: Business Management  Economic and Management Sciences 
199 
 


318 (24) Creativity and Innovation Management (4L)  
The importance of technological innovation; sources of innovation: creativity and organisational creativity; 
translating cre ativity into innovation; types and patterns of innovation; standards battles and design 
dominance; timing of entry; innovation strategies; choosing innovation projects; collaboration strategies; protecting innovation; introduction to the new product development process.  
Prerequisite modules: Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management 214 or  Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
Management 244 
Home department: Business Management  



348 (24) Strategic and Corporate Entrepreneurship (Intrapreneurship) (4L)  
Driving forces in the “new” economy that necessitate corporate entrepreneurship; link between 
entrepreneurship and strategic management; framework for entrepreneurial strategy; role of 
entrepreneurship in a large company and an analysis of the differences between entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship; factors which facilitate and inhibit intrapreneurship; the development of a framework for 
implementation of corporate entrepreneurship in South Africa; entrepreneurial leadership; link between 
corporate entrepreneurship and performance.  
Prerequisite modules: Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management 214 or  Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
Management 244 
Home department: Business Management  


Subject: 13353 Exchange Semester  





342 (60) Exchange Semester  
Only applicable to BCom (International Business) Stellenbosch University full degree seeking students.  
Students take part in a semester at one of Stellenbosch University’s partner institutions. The network of partners includes  a wide variety of world regions. All modules are pre -selected by the responsible 
department to fit in with the objectives and outcomes of the programme. 
Home department: Business Management  


Subject: 51047 Financial Management  





214 (16) Introduction to Financial Management (3L, 1P)  
Compiling the statement of financial position, the statement of profit or loss and the statement of cash flows; 
the measurement and evaluation of financial performance with reference to profitability, liquidity and 
solvency analysis; case studies about financial analysis; introduction to the investment decision; the financing decision; sources of finance; the dividend decision; financial planning and the management of working 
capital with specific reference  to cash, trade receivables and inventory control; financial failures; international 
financial management.  
Corequisite modules:  
• Business M anagement 113  
• Business M anagement 142 or  Mathematics 114 or Mathematics (Bio) 124 
Home department: Business Management  



244 (16) Corporate Financial Management (3L, 1P)  
The evaluation and interpretation of corporate financial performance by means of detailed ratio analyses and 
sustainability considerations; share and bond valuation; discussion of the influence of dividend policy on corporate valuations; the influence of financing policy on a firm’s value; the effect of behavioural biases and 
heuristics on investment decisions.  
Corequisite module: Financial Management 214  
Home department: Business Management  Economic and Management Sciences 
200  
 


314 (12) Financial Planning and Control (2L)  
Standardisation of published financial statements; reclassifying items from financial statements for 
managerial decision -making; application of financial planning process by means of financial forecasting; 
calculation of the su stainable growth rate; estimation of an optimal capital structure; the application of free 
cash flow valuations; the influence of inflation on annual financial statements.  
Corequisite modules:  
• Financial Management 214  
• Financial Management 244 or Investment Management 254  
Home department: Business Management  



332 (12) Capital Investments (2L)  
The application of the following financial selection measures on large capital projects: payback period method, method of the equivalent uniform annual cost, net present value method and the internal rate of return method; the impact of inflation when assessing investment projects and the calculation of the cost of 
capital; priority determination for multiple mutually exclusive projects.  
Corequisite modules:  
• Financ ial Management 214  
• Financial Management 244 or Investment Management 254  
Home department: Business Management  



352 (12) Financial Management Research (2L) 
Identification and formulation of financial management problems and/or opportunities; setting financial research objectives; identifying appropriate research designs; conducting secondary and/or primary 
research; conducting financial data analysis to achieve research objectives.  
Corequisite modules:  
• Financial Management 214  
• Financial Management 244 or Inve stment Management 254  
Home department: Business Management  



354 (12) Mergers and Acquisitions (2L) 
Processes during mergers and acquisitions; financial and strategic aspects; theories; relevance of competition and other legislation; empirical information; L BOs; MBOs; defensive strategies; joint ventures and 
alliances; unbundling; management guidelines.  
Corequisite modules:  
• Financial Management 214  
• Financial Management 244 or Investment Management 254  
Home department: Business Management  


Subject: 59765 Financial Planning  





314 (24) Financial Planning (4L)  
Principles and practices of financial planning; regulatory environment; personal financial management; the 
time value of money; risk management; principles of short -term and long- term insurance; healthcare 
planning; investment vehicles; client risk profiling; the investment planning process; retirement funds; 
taxation of retirement -fund lump sums; capital needs analysis at retirement; the retirement planning process.  
Corequisite module: Financial Management 214  
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254  
Home department: Business Management  



344 (24) Financial Planning (4L) 
Estate duty; matrimonial property law; law of succession; law and taxation of trusts; administration of estates; donations tax; capital gains tax; estate planning strategies and techniques; business entities; business insurance solutions.  
Corequisite module:  
• Financial Management 214  
• Financial Planning 314  
Prerequisite module: Investment Man agement 254  
Home department: Business Management  Economic and Management Sciences 
201 
 

Subject: 55344 Investment Management  





254 (16) Introduction to Investment Theory (3L, 1P)  
Portfolio theory and portfolio management; the relationship between risk and return; the efficient market 
hypothesis; valuation and risk of fixed income securities; evaluation of share investments; properties of 
derivative instruments; derivative strategies; valuation of options and futures; measurement and evaluation of portfolio returns.  
Corequisite  module: Business Management 113  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Business Management 142  
• Statistics and Data Science 188 or Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or  Probability Theory and 
Statistics 144  
Home department: Business Management  



314 (12) Equity Analysis (2L)  
Theory of valuation; valuation models and techniques; practical implementation of valuation models; valuation variables; stock market analysis; industry analysis; company analysis and stock selection; technical analysis; equity portfolio management strategies.  
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254  
Prerequisite pass modules: Statistics and Data Science 188 or  Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or 
Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Home department: Business Management  



324 (12) Fixed Income Securities (2L)  
Features and overview of fixed income securities and sectors; yield measures and spreads; valuations; interest rate risks and returns; credit analysis; term structure and interest rate dynamics; and other selected 
securities. 
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254  
Prerequisite pass modules:  Statistics and Data Science 188 or  Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or 
Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Home department: Business Management  



344 (12) Derivative Instruments (2L) 
Exposure to and handling of financial risk; the risk management process; the hedging concept; the functions 
of the treasury and the management of negotiable value; characteristics of derived financial instruments; 
strategies for the use of derived fin ancial instruments; valuation of options and futures contracts; basic 
arbitrage strategies with options and futures contracts; swaps and forward rate agreements; alternative 
investments. 
Prerequisite module: Investment Management 254  
Prerequisite pass modu les: Statistics and Data Science 188  or Probability Theory and Statistics 114  or 
Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Home department: Business Management  



349 (12) Property and Alternative  Investments (2L)  
This module focuses on preparing students to make investment decisions regarding property and other 
alternative investments (private equity, hedge funds, commodities etc.). In this regard, the focus  falls on 
themes such as markets and trends; financial and investment analysis in  respect of the acquis ition, 
ownership and sale; market valuation approaches; types of investment and  financing instruments.  
This module also focuses on the ethical management of investment portfolios  encompassed by the Code of 
Ethics and Standards of Professional Conduct of t he CFA Institute, which  includes themes such as: the 
liability of investment practitioners towards the profession, employers, clients,  possible clients and the broad 
public; reporting of historical investment returns; responsible risk -taking;  risk control.  
Prerequisite module:  
• Investment Management 254  
• Financial Management 214 or  Financial Accounting 178 or  Financial Accounting 188  
Prerequisite pass modules:  Statistics and Data Science 188  or Probability Theory and Statistics 114  or 
Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Home department: Business Management  Economic and Management Sciences 
202 
 

Subject: 11286 Management of Corporate Social Responsibility  





314 (12) Management of Corporate Social Responsibility (2L)  
Frameworks for planning and  evaluating the actions of individuals and the organisation in the context of 
sustainable and socially responsible activities. Key themes covered include: introduction to the concepts 
business ethics and Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR); strategic man agement of stakeholder 
relationships; voluntary and regulatory influences on CSR; CSR in a global environment; managerial 
implications of specific South African CSR issues; strategic approaches to managing CSR in organisations. 
The integration of socially responsible behaviour into other management disciplines, for example marketing, innovation, finance and investments.  
Prerequisite module: Business Management 113  
Home department: Business Management  


Subject: 23795 Marketing Management  





214 (16) Marketing Management (3L, 1P)  
Modern marketing dynamics in enterprises and the community; marketing and the value creation process; customer satisfaction through quality and service; strategic marketing planning; analysis of the marketing environm ent; marketing information and research; analysis of consumer markets and other types of markets; 
measurement and forecasting of demand; market segmentation and target market selection; product decisions; price decisions; channel decisions and place strate gy; communication decisions; direct marketing 
and sales promotion decisions.  
Corequisite modules:  
• Business Management 113  
• Financial Management 214 or  Financial Accounting 278 or  Financial Accounting 288 or  Biometry 212  
Home department: Business Management  



244 (16) Integrated and Digital Marketing Communication (3L, 1P)  
Marketing communication, advertising and the marketing process; the consumer audience; marketing communication research; functioning of marketing communication; marketing communication planning and 
strategy in traditional and digital environments; media; media planning and buying; traditional, new and 
digital media; planning and execution of creative advertising aspects; integration of the elements of marketing communication.  
Prerequisite modu le: Marketing Management 214  
Home department: Business Management  



314 (12) Omnichannel Retail Marketing (2L)  
Omnichannel approach to retail strategy and the retailing mix; location decisions; merchandise decisions; 
price decisions; communication decisions; consumer services and information; technology and systems; 
franchise agreements.  
Prerequisite module: Marketing Management 214  
Home department: Business Management  



324 (12) Services Management (2L) 
Unique characteristics of services; nature and process of service delivery; differences between product and service evaluations; development, communication and delivery of services; service quality and its 
measurement; the role of service providers and the environment of service delivery;  implementation of 
service- marketing strategies.  
Prerequisite module: Marketing Management 214  
Home department: Business Management  Economic and Management Sciences 
203 
 


344 (12) Marketing Research (2L)  
Defining of the marketing problem; research design; exploratory research design for secondary data and 
qualitative research; surveys and observations as part of descriptive research; measurement of perceptions; 
questionnaire design; sampling; fieldwork and data preparation; formulation of hypotheses and basic 
statistical tests. 
Prerequisite modu les: 
• Marketing Management 214  
• Marketing Management 244  
• Probability Theory and Statistics 144 or Statistics and Data Science 188  
Home department: Business Management  



354 (12) Strategic Marketing (2L)  
Function and application of marketing in different organisations and conditions; enterprise and marketing 
strategy; competitive marketing strategies; international marketing strategies; the marketing system; 
consumer markets and buying behaviour; institutional markets and buying behaviour; market ing planning 
processes; marketing controls. 
Prerequisite modules:  
• Marketing Management 214  
• Marketing Management 244  
Home department: Business Management  


Subject: 59587 Strategic Management  





344 (12) Strategic Management (1.5L, 0.5P) 
Strategic management challenges in complex environments; business models and strategy; strategic 
environmental analysis; strategic resources and capability analyses; strategic leadership; strategy 
development; knowledge, innovation and complexity man agement; strategy implementation; performance 
measurement and change management.  
Corequisite module: Business Management 


113 ( not applicable for students in Forest Science.)  
Home department: Business Management  
Department of Economics   


Subject: 14377 Behavioural Economics   





441 (10) Behavioural Economics (2L, 2T)  
This module provides an introduction to behavioural economics, which incorporates insights from psychology into standard microeconomic models, like discounted utility and expected utility. Several topics 
and applications will be discussed (including hyperbolic discounting, social preferences and motivated beliefs) with the objective to provide students with a foundation to a pply behavioural economic analysis, 
both formally and intuitively, in either a business or academic environment. The main focus is theoretical model building and analysis, with reference to and exploration of related empirical issues.  
Prerequisite pass mod ules:  
• Economics 318  
• Economics 388 
Corequisite module: Microeconomics 441  
Home department: Economics  


Subject: 14696  Data Science Research in Behavioural Economics   





471 (40) Data Science Research Project   
The r esearch assignment provides students with a comprehensive learning experience that integrates 
knowledge from previous modules . Students  will integrate knowledge and experiences gained from all 
previous modules and apply th ese to a data -rich research topic.  They  will have the opportunity to synthesise 
what they have learned and apply that knowledge to new, complex situations. Students shou ld engage in 
the entire process of solving a real -world data science problem, from collecting and processing actual data, Economic and Management Sciences 
204 
 and applying suitable and appropriate analytic methods to the problem , to communicating the results clearly  
and comprehensibl y.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Economics 311  
• Economics 388 
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Data Science 3 46 
Home department: Economics 


Subject: 10430 Econometrics  





441 (20) Econometrics  (2L, 2T)  
In part 1 of the module the building blocks of all standard time series models are formally derived and 
applied to real -world data. This prepares students for empirical economic research using time series data as 
well as serving as an introduction to theor etical econometric work.  
Part 2 of the module considers a range of more advanced quasi -experimental cross- sectional and panel 
models. Models will be introduced in the lectures and applied in the tutorials. The module focusses on the identification assumpt ions behind each model – when these assumptions are likely to hold and when they 
are unlikely to hold. This will equip students with the skills necessary to determine which of these models 
will be most appropriate for their own work.  
Prerequisite pass mod ules:   
• Economics 318  
• Economics 388 
Home department: Economics  


Subject: 12084 Economics  





114 (12) Economics (3L, 1T)  
Problems economists address: inequality, poverty, economic growth, sustainability, scarcity, choice. Economic 
decision- making: ince ntives, relative prices, economic rent, labour, production, opportunity cost.  
Economic relationships and interactions:  game theory, equity, efficiency. 
Markets: demand and supply, price -taking and competitive markets, elasticity, labour market.  
Market dyna mics: rent-seeking, market failure, externalities and government policies.  
Home department: Economics  



144 (12) Economics (3L, 1T)  
The module introduces students to economic application and policy, with a strong focus on South Africa, by 
exploring contemporary economic issues:  inflation, unemployment, economic growth, external stability and a 
fair distribution of income.  
The aggregate economy in the short- run and long- run: measuring the aggregate economy, the multiplier 
model, unemployment and fiscal policy, inflation and monetary policy, the money market and the South 
African  Reserve Bank  (SARB), technological  change  and income  inequality.  
Globalisation: international trade, migration and investment.  
Corequisite module: Economics 114  
Home department: Economics  



214 (16) Economics (3L, 1T)  
Macroeconomics: business cycle measurement, consumer and firm behaviour, closed one -period 
macroeconomic models, consumption and savings decisions in a two- period model  
Microeconomics : goods and factor markets, demand theory, production and cost theory, market structures 
and the theory of the firm, welfare theory. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Economics 114  
• Economics 144 
Home department: Economics  Economic and Management Sciences  
205 
 


244 (16) Economics (3L, 1T)  
South African monetary policy.  
International trade and finance: the theory of international trade, barriers to free trade, the World Trade 
Organisation and regional economic integration, the balance of payments, international financial markets, 
adjustment mechanisms, policy opti ons, exchange rate determination, the international monetary system 
and South African exchange rate policy.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Economics 114  
• Economics 144 
Corequisite module: Economics 214  
Home department: Economics  



281 (32) Development Economics (3L, 1T)  
This module consists of two parts:  
Economic  development  in historical  perspective:  The economic problem,  the emergence  of market society, the 
Industrial Revolution, the Great Depression, modern capitalism, the rise and fall of socialism, globalisation, African underdevelopment and South African economic development.  
Economic development and policy: Comparative economic development, theories of economic development, 
poverty and inequality, population growth, urbanisation and migration, rural development, education,  health,  
the environment,  economic policy and the role of the market, state and civil  society.  
Prerequisite pass module: Economics 114 or Economics  144 or Economics 288 
Home department: Economics  



288 (32) Economics (Arts and Social Sciences) (3L, 1T)  
The functioning of a mixed economic system and the market mechanism, as well as economic application 
and policy, with a strong focus on South Africa. 
Problems economists address: inequality, poverty, economic g rowth, sustainability, scarcity, choice.  
Economic decision -making: incentives, relative prices, economic rent, labour, production, opportunity cost.  
Economic relationships and interactions:  game theory, equity, efficiency. 
Markets: demand and supply, price -taking and competitive markets, elasticity, labour market.  
Market dynamics: rent -seeking, market  failure, externalities, and  government policies.  
The aggregate economy in the short- run and long- run: measuring the aggregate economy, unemployment 
and fiscal  policy, inflation and monetary policy, the money market and the South African Reserve Bank 
(SARB).  
Globalisation: international trade, migration and investment.  
Home department: Economics  



318 (24) Economics (4L, 1T)  
Introduction to econometrics: statistical concepts, the classical linear model of regression,  multicollinearity, 
autocorrelation, heteroscedasticity, dummy variables, estimation of regression  models. 
Macroeconomics:  mathematical techniques, economic growth, business cycle, monetary and fiscal p olicy. 
Introduction to game theory: mathematical techniques, different types of games, equilibrium concepts. 
Prerequisite pass module: Economics 214  
Prerequisite module: Economics 244  
Home department: Economics  



348 (24) Economics (4L, 1T)  
This module focuses on the economic policy debate in a developing country. This includes economic policy 
criteria, structural characteristics of the South African economy, economic thought and systems, and growth and development policies, which include demand and supp ly aspects of economic growth, sectoral and 
spatial development, distribution of income and social expenditure, competition policy, environmental economics, labour policy, education and investment in human capital and the macroeconomic policy debate.  
Prere quisite pass module: Economics 214  
Prerequisite module: Economics 244  
Corequisite module: Economics 318  
Home department: Economics  Economic and Management Sciences 
206 
 


381 (24) Institutional, Public and Environmental Economics (2L, 2T)  
The module consists of three parts: institutional economics, public economics and environmental economics.  
Institutional economics : the role of formal and informal institutions, and their enforcement. The role of 
transaction costs and the protection of property rights. 
Public economics : the benchmark model of a market economy, market failure, public choice, government 
failure, taxation, intergovernmental fiscal relations.  
Environmental economics : economic explanations for environmental degradation, policy measures, 
application to a specific environmental issue.  
Prerequisite module: Economics 214 or Economics  244 or Economics 281 
Home department: Economics  



388 (24) Economics (2L, 2T)  
Introduction to data science for economists: data scientific techniques applied to data in economics or finance. 
Topics include: prog ramming, visualisation and elementary machine learning methods.  
Labour economics and labour econometrics : labour market, demand and supply, demographic tendencies, 
trade unions, the South African labour market.  
Prerequisite pass module: Economics 214  
Prere quisite module: Economics 244  
Corequisite module: Economics 318  
Home department: Economics  


Subject: 10595 Macroeconomics   





441 (12) Macroeconomics (2L, 2T)  
This module covers the principal approaches used in modern macroeconomics to investigate the long -term 
growth performance (part 1) and business cycles (part 2) of market economies. While topics are similar to 
those studied in preceding modules, this advanced module is distinct in that all results are derived using fully 
formal methods that form the core of modern theoretical and empirical macroeconomic research. The 
module provides the necessary skills that students need to access the modern macroeconomic l iterature 
and prepares them for m aster’s level studies.  
Prerequisite  pass modules :  
• Economics 318  
• Economics 388 
Home department: Economics  


Subject: 10605 Microeconomics   





441 (12) Microeconomics (2L, 2T)  
This module introduces the standard framework for the analysis of decision -making by individual economic 
agents and their interaction in market and strategic environments. Topics include game theory, decision -
making under uncertainty, consumer theory, producer theory and markets. The emphasis in this module is on a formal understanding of foundational concepts and more advanced mathematical formulations of standard models and results that form the basis of modern economics research in many fields.  
Prerequisite pass modules:   
• Economics 318  
• Economics 388 
Home department: Economics  Economic and Management Sciences 
207 
 Department of English (Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 53880 English Studies  





178 (24)  Literature and Language in Context (2 L, 1T) 
The module is designed to develop the student’s ability to analyse a wide variety of texts and to 
communicate effectively in written and spoken English. The focus is on cultural and literary studies and on the development of an appropriate academic discourse. A description of the components listed below and 
the list of texts are provided in the Course Prospectus.  
All students take the following lecture components:  
• Text and Context 
• Film Studies  
• Prose  
• Dram a 
Notes:  
Full details about the module are in the course prospectus on the Department's website at: 
www0.sun.ac.za/english/students/undergraduate/eng- 178/  
Department of Geography and Environmental Studies (Faculty of 
Arts and Social Sciences)   
Note:  For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 64165 Geo -Environmental Science  


Please note:  Geo-Environmental Science 124 and 154 are corequisite modules for Geography and 
Environmental Studies 2 and 3. 



124 (16) Introduction to Human- Environmental Systems (3L, 3P)  
Nature of human geography; demography of world population; food resources; urbanisation: models of 
urban structure, functional areas in cities, cities in developing countries; politico -geographical organisation: 
nations and states in conflict, regions in the news; environmental systems on a global scale: fluvial, arid, karst, coastal and glacial environments; ecosystems and humans; utilisation of environmental resources: global occurrence, use and depletion of non -renewable energy, water and soil resources; practical mapping and 
graphics.  
Home dep artment: Geography and Environmental Studies  



154 (16) Introduction to Earth Systems Science (3L, 3P)  
Introduction to earth systems science; internal earth processes; mineral - and rock -forming processes; origin 
of magma and igneous rocks; external structure  of the earth; formation of continents; plate tectonics; 
sedimentary rocks and the geological record; geological time scale; metamorphic rocks and mountain building; geology of South Africa; energy and mineral resources; humans and tectonics: earthquakes and volcanoes; the hydrosphere; surface -water processes; groundwater processes; theory of the origin and 
evolution of life. 
Home department: Geography and Environmental Studies  Economic and Management Sciences 
208 
 Department of Industrial Psychology   


Subject: 14221 Human Capital Metrics  





344 (12) Human Capital Metrics (3L) 
This module develops the data -driven, evidence- based decision -making skills of students to prepare them 
for measuring human capital as one of the six capitals of business. Human capital analytics and metrics is 
one of the emerging fields of competence for all board members and managers required to manage people 
and to report on human capital in integrated reports. Human capital metrics can show connecti ons, 
correlations and causality between human capital analytics and demonstrate the tangible link between 
people strategy and organisational performance.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  


Subject: 10553 Industrial Psychology 





114 (12) Industrial Psychology (3L, 1P)  
The nature of Industrial Psychology and its historical development in South Africa; the determinants of work 
performance and well -being; the different components of and directions within Industrial Psychology; the 
differe nt roles of Industrial Psychologists; and the nature and role of research within the subject. The nature 
of organisational health and well -being, with reference to its determinants, its management and its 
enhancement, and the development of positive organi sational behaviour. The role of work stress and coping 
with it; the management of performance dysfunctions; and the management of HIV/ Aids  in the workplace. 
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



144 (12) Human Resource Management (3L, 1P)  
The field and context of personnel/human resource management, organisational positioning of the human 
resource management department, strategic human resource management, human resource planning, job 
analysis, recruiting, selection, induction, training and development, performance appraisal, basic 
remuneration, job evaluation, incentive payment, indirect compensation, labour turnover, absenteeism, human resource management information systems, safety and health, human resource accounting, flexitime, 
quality of work life,  social responsibility, issues in and challenges to human resource management, human 
resource management audit, the role of human resource management in die economic and labour situation 
in South Africa – present and future.  
Home department: Industrial Psy chology  



214 (16) Psychometrics (3L, 1P)  
Introduction to psychometrics, introduction to and overview of the scientific research process, implications of 
Industrial Psychology's commitment to the scientific method. Measurement, measurement procedures and 
mea suring instruments, psychological tests, types of psychological tests, psychological tests and decision -
making. Basic concepts in measurement and statistical analysis, psychological measurement, evaluation of 
psychological measuring instruments, statistical concepts. Scales of measurement, transformations and 
norms, expectancy tables. Reliability of psychological measures, sources of consistency and inconsistency in 
measures, general model of reliability, reliability estimation, reliability coefficients and  the standard error of 
measurement, the generalisability of test scores. The use and interpretation of information on the reliability of 
measurements, the use of the reliability coefficient, factors that affect the reliability coefficient, special issues 
in measurement reliability. The validity of measurements – content and construct validity, types of validity, 
determining the validity of measurements, content validity, construct validity. The validity of measurements – 
criterion -related validity, decision- making and prediction, criteria, criterion -related validity, interpretation of 
validity coefficients. Issues in the assessment of ability, bias and fairness in psychological assessment, culture -free measuring instruments, the nature- nurture debate on IQ. Psychological assessment in industry – 
predictor issues, extent and impact of psychological assessment in industry, different types of predictors, 
comparative evaluation of different types of predictors, a social and legal perspective on psychological 
assessment. Psychological assessment in industry – criterion problems, objective and subjective 
performance measures, selection utility.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  Economic and Management Sciences  
209 
 


224 (16) Consumer Behaviour (3L, 1P)  
Introduction to consumer behaviour: diversity of consumer behaviour, consumer research, market 
segmentation. The consumer as an individual: consumer needs and motivation, personality, perception, 
learning and consumer involvement, attitudes and communication. The consumer in their social and cultural 
setting: group dynamics and family, social class, culture, sub -culture and cross -culture; Consumer decision -
making process: consumer influence and the diffusion of innovations, consumer decision -making.  
Exposure to the application of theory in practice will  take place through the studying of advertising.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



252 (8) Occupational Psychology (1.5L, 0.5P)  
Domain demarcation, core concepts and fundamentals of Occupational Psychology, individual differences, 
developmental psychology. Career models, career development, career choice, entry into the world of work, 
early, mid and late career years, stress, diversity management, entrepreneurial careers, management and 
support systems.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



262 (8) Ergonomics (1.5L, 0.5P)  
Nature and history of Ergonomics, Context of Ergonomics (general and environment effects, legislation, 
management and productivity, built environment), perception and sensation (senses, observation, conscious 
and unconscious, memory and attention), work environment (space and shape, lighting, noise and vibration, 
temperature, atmospheric and chemical, processing information and design guidelines), input (displays), 
output (activities and rest), controls and tools, systems malfunction  (errors, safety and health), introduction to 
Information Ergonomics (mental maps and usability), summary.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



314 (12) Labour Relations (2L, 1P)  
Introduction and overview of field of study, historical development of labour relations, environmental 
influences of labour relations, trade unions, employers, state, labour relations in the workplace (grievances, 
discipline, and dismissal). Introduction to labour legislation: Labour Relations Act, Basic Conditions of 
Employment Act. 
Corequisite module: Industrial Psychology 144  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



324 (12) Human Resource Development (2L, 1P)  
Introduction to training, education,  and development: an overview of the macro -factors that affect training 
and developme nt in South Africa, the national training strategy of South Africa. Aspects of managing training 
in an enterprise: the place and role of the training function in the organisation, training models. The 
administration of training: training records and inform ation systems, training costs and budgets. The 
theoretical aspects of learning: basic learning principles, adult learning, learning styles. Determining training 
needs: training needs assessment, models for determining training needs. Programme design: form ulating 
training objectives, factors that affect course development, competency -based training. The evaluation of 
training.  
Corequisite module: Industrial Psychology 144  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



348 (24) Organisational Psychology (4L, 1P)  
Individual behaviour: perceptions, personality, attitudes, values, cultural diversity, work motivation, behaviour 
modification, job design; group and intergroup behaviour; leadership, power and politics, managerial 
development, decision -making, communication, organisational theory structure and design, organisational 
culture, organisational change and development.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  Economic and Management Sciences 
210 
 Special modules presented by the Department of Industrial Psychology  


Subject: 36846 Industrial Psychology (Occupational Therapy)  





132 (6) Industrial Psychology (Occupational Therapy) (2L) 
The human being as employee; human resource planning; recruitment; selection; placement and induction; 
communication; motivation; leadership in organisations; overview of labour relations. The module is designed 
for students in Occupational Therapy and these perspectives will be highlighted throughout.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  


Subject: 44776 Industrial Psychology (Special)  





244 (12) Industrial Psychology (Special) (3L)  
Lectures are attended by BCom (Management Accounting) students.  
Human resource management: human resource planning, recruitment, selection, induction, training and 
devel opment, performance appraisal, compensation management, labour turnover, absenteeism, health and 
safety. 
Labour relations:  field of study, organised labour, role of employers; labour legislation.  
Organisational behaviour:  introduction and orientation, orga nisational design, the individual, groups and 
teamwork, motivation, leadership, organisational effectiveness.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



354 (12) Industrial Psychology (Special) (3L)  
Human resource management: human resource planning, recruitment, selection, induction, training and 
development, performance appraisal, compensation management, labour turnover, absenteeism, health and 
safety. 
Labour relations:  field of study, organised labour, role of employers; labour legislation.  
Organisational b ehaviour:  introduction and orientation, organisational design, the individual, groups and 
teamwork, motivation, leadership, organisational effectiveness.  
Home department: Industrial Psychology  


Subject: 13351 Introduction to Intercultural Communication  





312 (12) Introduction to Intercultural Communication (4L)  
Fundamentals of linguistic communication, including the general nature of language and communication, 
and the functions and use of language in va rious types of discourse; fundamentals of intercultural (linguistic) 
communication, including the linguistically relevant components and functions of culture, and potential 
barriers to intercultural communication; pragmatic and sociolinguistic aspects of intercultural 
communication; general and culture -specific patterns in the use of language across cultures, and the 
management of culture -specific features of discourse in intercultural communication; mechanics of 
intercultural communication, including the characteristics of/conditions for successful communication, the characteristics and causes of failure of intercultural communication in various kinds of linguistic interaction, and strategies for avoiding and repairing failure of intercultural communication . 
Home department: Industrial Psychology  



344 (12) Introduction to Intercultural Communication (4L)  
Fundamentals of linguistic communication, including the general nature of language and communication, and the functions and use of language in various types  of discourse; fundamentals of intercultural (linguistic) 
communication, including the linguistically relevant components and functions of culture, and potential barriers to intercultural communication; pragmatic and sociolinguistic aspects of intercultural communication; general and culture -specific patterns in the use of language across cultures, and the 
management of culture -specific features of discourse in intercultural communication; mechanics of 
intercultural communication, including the characterist ics of/conditions for successful communication, the 
characteristics and causes of failure of intercultural communication in various kinds of linguistic interaction, 
and strategies for avoiding and repairing failure of intercultural communication.  
Home department Industrial Psychology  Economic and Management Sciences 
211 
 Department of Information Science (Faculty of Arts and Social 
Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 14689  Organisational Informatics  





214 (16) Principles of Information Systems ( 3L, 1T) 
This is a theoretical module that covers the core principles of i nformation systems and how they are 
developed, used, and managed in contemporary practice. Students will cover themes such as technological 
infrastructure of information systems, the role of information systems in busin ess operation, and the 
management of information systems development projects.  
Home department: Information Science  



244 (16) Introduction to Application Design (2 L, 1P) 
This modul e introduces students to computer application development on both theoretical and practical 
level . The modu le does not require students to have any prior computer programming experience. An 
understanding of fundamental concepts in programming such as data types , variables, input, output, flow 
control (including iteration and decision structures) , modules and functions is established. Students 
implement these principles through the use of a contemporary programming language. Additionally, 
students will learn abou t key development standards such as HTML and CSS.  
Please note: This module may not be taken alongside or following Computer Science 114.  
Home department: Information Science  



318 (24) Systems Analysis and Design (3L, 3P)  
This module addressed systems ana lysis and design in the context of information systems projects. It adopts 
a practical orientation and aims, firstly, to expose students to the key principles of information system s 
analysis and design from the perspective of a systems analyst. S ystems analysis activi ties and  the associated 
documentation and the mode lling standards are presented. This is followed by the essential aspects of 
systems design, including the relevant tec hniques and standards. Students apply these principles through 
practical, case -based assignments.  
Prerequisite pass modules: 
• Organisational  Informatics 2 14 
• Organisational  Informatics 2 44 or Computer Science 114  
Home department: Information Science  



348 (24) Systems Development  (2L, 4P) 
This module integrates and extends knowledge and skills from prior modules in Socio- and Organisational 
Informatics. The module  covers system s development approaches and project management, as well as 
advanced design and deployment concepts.  
Students execute a group -based project to design and develop a fully functional information system , using 
appropriate modern development technologies, design approaches and project management 
methodologies.  
Prerequisite module:  Organ isational Informatics 318  
Prerequisite pass module: Organisational Informatics 2 44 or Computer Science 114  
Home department: Information Science  


Subject: 58173  Socio-Informatics  





214 ( 16) Interaction Design (2L, 2P)  
This mod ule concerns the design of interfaces for computer applications  (e.g., web and mobile applications, 
business information systems) . Students will be introduced to current approaches to information architecture  
and applications structure and the key elements of interface design. The module has a practical orientation in which a modern design platform is used to perform practical assignments.  
Home department: Information Science  Economic and Management Sciences 
212 
  


244 (16 ) Information Society (3L, 1T) 
Pervasive digital media, expanding information occupations and the development of the internet have 
combined to give rise to the global information society. In this module students will study this information 
explosion by critically examining the major theoretical  approaches to information al development through the 
work  of prominent theorists including Castells , Schiller, Habermas and Giddens.  
Home department: Information Science  



348 (24) Computational Social Science (3L, 3P)  
This module introduces students t o the interdisciplinary field of computational social science , which 
combines insights  from computer and information science, sociology and social network analysis, 
economics, political science and public health in order to quip students to answer social s cience questions 
using computational methods.  
Students are not expected to have any prior computer programming knowledge. Students will learn to ask 
social science  questions  and answer these questions by collecting and analysing data from digital sources . 
Students will acquire skills in data analysis programming language s and in data analysis techniques  for 
working with digital trace data.  
Home department: Information Science  
Department of Logistics   


Subject: 10906 Advanced Line ar Programming  





441 ( 15) Advanced Linear Programming (2L)  
Advanced linear programming (LP) solution techniques are studied in this module. These techniques include 
the product form of the inverse, primal -dual algorithms, primal and dual upper bounded algorithms, column 
generation methods, decomposition and interior point methods  
Prerequisite pass modules: Operations Research 244  
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 14023 Business Analytics  





214 (16) Business Analytics (3L, 2T)  
Introduction to optimisation and modelling:  Modelling with linear programming, graphical methods, 
spreadsheet solutions, sensitivity, goal programming and applications using spreadsheets.  
Decision modelling: Basic concepts,  multi -criterion decision analysis, decision trees, utility theory, analytical 
hierarchy process. Case studies and spreadsheet applications.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or  Probability Theory and Statistics 144 or 
Statistics and Data Science 188  
Home department: Logistics 



244 (16) Business Analytics (3L, 2T)  
Social network analytics. Introduction to R types of social networks (friend, user -generated content, 
affiliation), graph visualisation (nodes, edges, paths, centrality, cliques), network relationships (ties, social 
capital, structural holes, structural balance, equivalence, homophily, clustering, small world), network evolution (random graphs, preferential attachment, reciprocity), marketing research (network data collection, 
sampling, hypothesis testing).  
Prerequisite pass module:  Probability Theory and Statistics 114  or Probability Theory and Statistics  144 or 
Statistics and Data Science 188  
Home department: Logistics Economic and Management Sciences 
213 
 


318 (24) Business Analytics (3L, 2T) 
Basic web page scripting, measures and analysis of web page usage, web page usage pattern variation for 
improvement, introduction to and technologies required for large -data -set analytics, analysis of extracted 
data with SQL, NoSQL and a selection of machine -learning methods, considerations in data warehousing and 
data stream processing and analytics.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Probability Theory and Statistics 114  or Probability Theory and Statistics 144  or 
Statistics and Data Science 188  
Home department: Logistics 



348 (24) Business Analytics (3L, 3P)  
Data and information visualisation: identifying data types; metadata descriptions; applying appropriate charts, 
graphs or mapping techniques.  
Quality control,  performance measurement and performance management: control cards, dashboards, 
balanced scorecards, Six Sigma.  
Business report writing:  Using applicable software.  
(Only final -year students may enrol for this module.)  
Prerequisite pass module:  Statistics and Data Science 188 or Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or Probability 
Theory and Statistics  144 
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 14695  Data Science Research in Analytics and Optimisation  





471 (40) Data Science Research Project   
The research assignment provides students with a comprehensive learning experience that integrates 
knowledge from previous modules . Students  will integrate knowledge and experiences gained from all 
previous modules and apply th ese to a data -rich research topic.  They  will have the opportunity to synthesise 
what they have learned and apply that knowledge to new, complex situations. Students shou ld engage in 
the entire process of solving a real -world data science problem, from collecting and processing actual data, 
and applying suitable and appropriate analytic methods to the problem , to communicating the results clearly  
and comprehensibl y.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Operations Research 314   
• Operations Research 344  
• Operations Research 352  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Data Science 3 46 
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 48062 Information Systems 





112 (6) Information Systems in a Business Environment (1L, 1P)  
Practical ability to use information systems technology in a business environment. Understanding and ability to use institutional applications, word processors, presentation software, spreadsheets and macros.  
Note:  
Information Systems 144 and Information Systems 112 may not be presented together for degree purposes. 
Home department: Logistics Economic and Management Sciences 
214 
 

Subject: 13350 Introduction to Transport and Logistics Systems  





144 (12) Introduction to Transport and Logistics Systems (3L, 1P)  
Introduction to the unique purpose of the transport system; the components of the system; the economic 
significance of the transport system; the organisation and regulation of transport; conce pts of demand and 
supply; and transport from a management perspective.  
The scope of product supply chains; aspects of utility and value creation; aspects of materials management, 
including resource and inventory acquisition; aspects of production and operations management; aspects of 
physical distribution management; conforming to customer requirements with respect to product supply and 
delivery. 
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 14219 Logistics and Supply Chain Management  





214 (16) Logistics and Supply Chain Management (3L, 1P) 
Introduction to Logistics and Supply Chain Management:  Supply chain overview, the role of logistics  in the 
firm, the elements of logistics,  integrated  logistics  management, organisation  for effective logistics, 
international  logistics,  new  trends. 
Demand Management:  Balancing supply and demand, demand forecasting, sales and operations planning, 
collaborative planning, forecasting and replenishment.  
Order Management and Customer Service: Order management, customer service and relationship 
management.  
Supply chain technology and information flows:  Role of information and data in the supply chain, the 
implementation and use of software and technology in the supply chain. Logistics Research: literature review, how to find and read academic sources.  
Prerequisite module: Bu siness Management 113  
Home department: Logistics 



244 (16) Logistics and Supply Chain Management (3L, 1P) 
Supply Management / Procurement : Impact on the firm’s bottom line, progression from tactical to strategic 
role, cross -functional impact and process; procurement cycle, public sector procurement.  
Portfolio of relationships : Tactical, collaborative , strategic alliance, logistics relationships, 3PL industry 
overview. Sourcing materials and services : Managing procurement, strategic sourcing, global sourcing, outsourcing, 
total cost of ownership (TCO), negotiation.  
Producing goods and services : Role of production operations in the supply chain, operations strategy and 
planning, decisions in production, production technology, packaging in the supply ch ain. 
Inventory in the supply chain: Role of inventory in the economy and organisations, inventory costs, inventory 
management approaches, inventory classification.  
Logistics research: Identifying and defining the logistics research problem.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  Business Management 113  
Prerequisite module:  Logistics and Supply Chain Management 214  or Introduction to Transport and Logistics 
Systems 144 
Home department: Logistics Economic and Management Sciences  
215 
 


314 (12) Logistics and Supply Chain Management (2L)  
Transport:  Role of tran sportation; challenges faced in transportation; modes of transportation; transportation 
planning and strategy; execution and control; transportation technology; vehicle costing and fleet 
management.  
Distribution : Role of distribution; distribution planning and strategy; distribution execution; distribution 
technology.  
Supply chain sustainability:  logistics and the environment, supply chain sustainability framework.  
Reverse logistics:  reverse logistics systems, reverse flows, closed loop supply chains, customer returns, 
environmental challenges and technology application to improve reverse flows.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Business Management 113  
Please note:  You may not  take any third- year Logistics and Supply Chain Management modules in 
combination with Financial Accounting 389.  
Home department: Logistics 



324 (12) Logistics and Supply Chain Management (2L)  
Supply  chain network  analysis  and design : Network  design  as a part of supply  chain  planning;  
logistics/supply chain  network  design;  modelling approaches.  
Logistics  performance  measurement and financial  analysis : Performance  measurement;  logistics/supply 
chain  performance  metrics;  benchmarking  the supply  chain;  impact  of logistics  on financial performance.  
Supply chain strategy: strategic supply chain resource requirements, supply chain strategy implementation, change management, stakeholder management, integrated metrics.  
Supply chain risk : managing risk in supply chains and business continuity planning.  
Prerequisite module: Logistics  and Supply Chain Management 214  or Logistics and Supply Chain 
Management 244  or Introduction to Transport and Logistics System s 114  
Please note:  You may not take any third- year  Logistics and Supply Chain Management modules in 
combination with Financial Accounting 389.  
Home department: Logistics 



344 (12) Logistics and Supply Chain Management (2L, 1P) 
Logistics analysis:  For both functional excellence and integrative excellence, a  variety of analytical 
techniques and enabling technology can be employed to support decisions on the short, medium and longer 
timeframes. Analytical techniques (descriptive and normative) and enabling technology (transactional vs. analytical information t echnology) form an integral part of the support decision -makers require.  
Logistics research:  getting data (qualitative and quantitative), data preparation, formulation of hypotheses and 
basic statistical tests, with applications in the fields of logistics and supply chain management.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Statistics and Data Science 188 or Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or  Probability 
Theory and Statistics 144  
Please note: You may not  take any  third -year Logistics and Supply Chain Management modules in 
combination with Financial Accounting 389 . 
Home department: Logistics 



354 (12) Logistics and Supply Chain Management (2L)  
Logistics research:  research design; exploratory research design for secondary data and qualitative research; 
surveys and observations as part of descriptive research; measurement of perceptions; questionnaire design; 
sampling; fieldwork.  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Logistics and Supply Cha in Management 314  
• Logistics and Supply Chai n Management  324  
Please note:  You may not  take any third- year Logistics and Supply Chain Management modules in 
combination with Financial Accounting 389.  
Home department: Logistics Economic and Management Sciences 
216 
 

Subject: 12318 Metaheuristics  





441 (15) Metaheuristics (2L) 
Practical operations research p roblems are often computationally too complex to solve via classical solution 
methods. This module explores methods that can determine good and not necessarily the best solutions in 
these circumstances. This module has a practical problem -solving approach.  The theory and solution 
techniques (tabu search, evolutionary metaheuristics, simulated annealing, ant colony algorithms and hybrid 
methods) are discovered, handled and applied from the perspective of different problem formulations.  
Students who follow this module must be able to programme in Python.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Operations Research 314  
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 11907 Methods of Operations Research   





441 (1 5) Methods of Operations Research (2L)  
This pro ject- driven module is offered in collaboration with a number of partners in industry, in order to give 
students practical experience in operations research model ling. The module is offered in the form of project-
driven cycles, in which site visits to industry, mathematical modelling and an oral presentation of the model and findings, as well as written reporting of results play an important role. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Operations Research 314  
• Operations Research 322  
• Operations Research 352  
• Operations Research 344  
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 55336 Operations Research  





214 (16) Network Optimisation (3L, 3P)  
Introduction to network modelling. Heuristics vs. exact methods, connectedness of directed and undirected 
networks, shortest paths (algorithms of Dijkstra and Floyd), longest paths (project scheduling), shortest spanning trees (algorithms of Kruskal and Prim), location problems (generalised centres and medians), 
maximum flow problems. Applications using suitable software.  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Mathematics 114  
• Mathematics 144  
Home department: Logistics 



244 (16) Linear Programming (3L, 3P)  
Modelling by means of linear programming. Geometry of LP, properties of solutions, fundamental theorem of 
LP, simplex algorithm, big M and two -phase methods, sensitivity analysis, duality and complementary 
slackness, matrix games. Zero -sum games. Special cases of the simplex algorithm (transport, transhipment, 
assignment and minimum cos t flow). Applications using suitable software. 
Prerequisite module: Mathematics 114  
Prerequisite pass module: Mathematics 144  
Home department: Logistics 



314 (16) Combinatorial Optimisation (3L, 3P)  
Binary and integer programming (branch -and-bound methods and cutting plane methods), heuristics (n -Opt 
procedures). Applications with respect to assignment problems, colouring problems, covering problems and Economic and Management Sciences 
217 
 domination problems, Hamiltonian graphs (the travelling salesperson problem). Knapsack problems. 
Determini stic dynamic programming. Applications using suitable software.  
Prerequisite module: Operations Research 244   
 or  
Prerequisite pass modules:  Business Analytics 214 and Business Analytics 244, with a n average  final mark of at 
least 80%  for the two together , and a pass mark  in a departmental cross -over assessment  
Home department: Logistics 



322 (16) Stochastic Methods of Operations Research (3L, 3P)  
Queuing theory (modelling of arrival and service processes, birth -death processes, single and multiple server 
queues, finite population, constant service time, open queue networks, priorities, chi-squared test), Markov 
analysis, simulation (random numbers, continuous random variables, Monte Carlo simulation, discrete 
random event simulation, analysis of output). Stochastic dynamic programming. Applications using suitable software. 
Prerequisite pass module: Probability Theory and Statistics 114  or Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
or 
Prerequisite pass modules:  Business Analytics 214 and Business Analytics 244, with an average final mark of at 
least 80 % for the two together, and a pass mark in  departmental cross -over assessment  
Home department: Logistics 



344 (16) Optimisation (3L, 3P)  
Introduction to optimisation and functions in R n, unconstrained optimisation (search methods and gradient 
methods), constrained optimisation (Lagrange multipliers, quadratic programming, separable optimisation). 
Goal Programming. Applications by means of suitable software.  
Corequisite module: Operations Research 244   
or  
Prerequisite pass modules: Business Analytics 214 and  Business Analytics 244, with an average final mark of at 
least 80%  for the two together, and a pass mark in  a departmental cross -over assessment . 
Home department: Logistics 



352 (16) Decision Modelling (3L, 3P)  
Decision analysis cycle, problem structuring, decision criteria, decision trees, influence diagrams, multi-
criteria decision analysis, utility theory, multi- attribute utility theory, analytical network process, fuzzy 
modelling and optimisation, decision -making software, decision support systems.  
Prerequisite pass module: Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or  Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
or 
Prerequisite pass modules: Business Analytics 214 and  Business Analytics 244 , with an average final mark of at 
least 80 % for the two together , and a pass mark in  a departmental cross -over assessment.   
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 51993 Project Management  





314 (24) Project Management (3L , 1P) 
Project management principles and methodologies. Alignment between corporate strategies and projects. 
Scheduling of projects and tasks, resource allocation, communication and cost management. Management 
of risk and stakeholders and monitoring of projects and teams. Understanding change management and 
measuring and evaluating progress on activities on time and cost basis.   
(You can enrol for this module  only from your third year of study in Economic and Management Sciences).  
Home department: Logistics Economic and Management Sciences 
218 
 

Subject: 14372 Systems Dynamics  





441 ( 15) Systems Dynamics (2L)  
System d ynamics is a simulation technique with which the nonlinear behaviour of complex systems can be 
analysed by using stocks, flows and internal feedback loops. In this module students will be introduce d to 
systems thinking and systems modelling.  There will also be focussed on the modelling of change, positive 
and negative feedback, S -shaped growth and oscillation, delays and s moothing, model calibration as well as 
the important component of validation and verification. 
Prerequisite pass modules:   
• Operations Research 314  
• Operations Research 322  
• Operations Research 352  
• Operations Research 344  
Home department: Logistics 


Subject: 21008 Transport Economics  





214 (16) Introduction to Transport Economics (3L)  
This module introduces students  to the role and functions of transportation in the local, national  and 
international contexts. Supply and demand characteristics of each mode are explored, including the use  of 
new transportation technologies in modern supply chains. Furthermore, the role  of government in  
establishing, maintaining and expanding transportation systems to improve the sustainability and liveability  
of modern cities is discussed. The relationship between transport investment and economic development  
will also be discussed, inc luding the impact on land use.  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Economics 114  
• Economics  144 
Home department: Logistics 



244 (16) Transport and Land Economics (3L)  
This module introduces the concept of land economics and the relationship between transportation and land  
use within an urban context. It provides students with a greater understanding of the impact of transport on  
land use, land prices, product prices and industrial location. The economic characteristics of passenger and  
freight demand , as well as the pricing and cost structure of urban transport modes , are covered. Different 
transport policy instruments and subsidisation of urban passenger transport modes are discussed.  
Prerequisite modules: 
• Economics 114  
• Economics 144 
• Transport Economics 214  
Home department: Logistics 



318 (24) Transport Planning and Evaluation (4L) 
This module is an applied subject and its aim is to introduce students to land and transport systems analysis 
and modelling. This includes land and transport demand analysis and forecasting of passenger and goods 
transport demand using the four -step transport model. Students are introduced to economic evaluation 
techniques of land and transport infrastructure projects. The relationship between transport and ec onomic 
development is discussed. The spatial relationship between transport and land values is presented.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Economics 114  
• Economics 144 
• Transport Economics 214  
• Transport Economics 244  
Home department: Logistics 



348 (24) Transport Modal Economics and Management (4L)  
This module comprehensively discusses the operational environment for shipping, air and rail. Modal  cost 
and market structures for shipping, air and rail transport are thoroughly studied. Supply, demand and rates 
for shipping, air, and  rail transport are discussed. Particular attention is paid to the demand for these transport 
modes and the factors that determine demand. Government interest in and the regulation of transport Economic and Management Sciences 
219 
 infrastructure and operations for the various modes are presented. The importance of shipping, air and rail 
transport for international trade and economic growth is discussed in the last section of the module. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Economics 114  
• Economics 144 
• Transport Economics 244  
Home department: Logistics 
Department of Mathematical Sciences (Mathematics, Applied 
Mathematics, Computer Science) (Faculty of Science)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Science, see the Yearbook  part 
for the Faculty of Science.  


Subject: 20710 Applied Mathematics  





114 (16) Probability Theory and Statistics (3L, 3T) 
Combinatorial an alysis; the basic counting principles; permutations and combinations. Random phenomena; 
sample spaces and events; the probability axioms; the probability of an event; random selection; probability 
rules; conditional probability; the rule of Bayes; stochastic independence. Discrete and continuous stochastic variables; expected value and variance of a stochastic variable; important discrete distributions: binomial, 
Poisson, geometric, hypergeometric, negative binomial; important continuous distributions, uniform, normal  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Applied Mathematics  



144 (16) Modelling in Mechanics (3L, 3T)  
Development of the skilled use of vector, differential and integral calculus in the modelling of dynamics of simple physical systems, including the analysis of force fields, motion and modelling assumptions. 
Prerequisite module:  Mathematics 114  
Corequisite module:  Mathematics 144  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Applied Mathematics  


Subject: 18139 Computer Science  





113 (16) Computer Science for Actuarial Studies (3L, 3P)  
Introduction to computer programming from a financial perspective. Basic financial problems are rephrased 
in terms of analytical problem solving. Standard imperative programming constructs in cluding types of 
variables, assignments, if -then- else and loops, and recursive approaches are covered as needed in financial 
programming. Static data structures (in particular arrays) and declarative programming models such as spreadsheets are also covered . 
Corequisite modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Mathematics 114  
Home Department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science  



114 (16) Introductory Computer Science (3L, 3P) 
Introduction to basic computer programming; formulation and solution of problems by means of computer programming; data representation and variable types (including character strings, integers, floating point 
numbers and Boolean variables); assignment statements; conditional execution and iteration; static data structures (arr ays and records); input and output (including graphics and sound); modular programming; 
recursion; testing and debugging; introduction to object- oriented programming (including abstraction, 
encapsulation and use of existing object implementations).  
Corequisite module: Mathematics 114  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science Economic and Management Sciences  
220 
 


144 (16) Introductory Computer Science (3L, 3P) 
Further formulation and solution of problems by means of computer programming; introductory data 
structure s and algorithms in an object -oriented set- up; key concepts in object orientation: inheritance and 
polymorphism; design patterns as abstractions for the creation of reusable object -oriented designs; 
searching and sorting algorithms; complexity theory for t he analysis of algorithms; fundamental methods in 
the design of algorithms; dynamic data structures; regular expressions and finite automata.  
Prerequisite module: Computer Science 113 or Computer Science  114 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division  Computer Science 



214 (16) Data Structures and Algorithms (3L, 3T) 
The classical data structures and algorithms in an object -oriented set- up. Advanced techniques for the 
analysis of algorithms.  
Prerequisite pass module: Computer Science 144  
Prerequisite mo dules: Mathematics 114  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science 



244 (16) Computer Architecture (3L, 3P)  
Basic computer architecture. Programming in machine language and assembly language. Assemblers, binders and loaders. Basic conc epts of operating systems; memory management, process management and 
files systems.  
Prerequisite modules: Computer Science 214  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science 



313 (16) Computer Networks (3L, 3P)  
Introduction to networks in  general and the internet in particular. Architecture and protocols. Allocation of 
resources and congestion control. Network security. Applications.  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Computer Science 214  
• Computer Science  244 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science  



314 (16) Concurrency (3L, 3P)  
Introduction to programming techniques and principles of concurrent systems, from operating systems to 
application programs. This includes communication, synchronisation, scheduling and load  balancing. Several 
parallel and distributed architectures will be covered.  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Computer Science 214  
• Computer Science  244 
Prerequisite modules for programmes in Engineering:  
• Computer Science E 214  
• Computer Systems 245  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science 



315 (16) Machine Learning (3L, 3T)  
Dimension reduction techniques; machine -learning techniques based on maximum -likelihood, maximum-
posterior and expectation -maximisation estimates; modellin g using logistic regression, Gaussian mixtures 
and hidden Markov models. 
Prerequisite modules:  
• Computer Science 144 or Computer Science E  214 
• Mathematical Statistics 245 and Mathematical Statistics 246  together or Systems and Signals 344  on 
its own  
• Mathema tics 214 or  Applied Mathematics 214 or Engineering Mathematics 214  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science Economic and Management Sciences 
221 
 


343 (16) Databases and Web Centric Programming (3L, 3P) 
Introduction to relational databases. Mapping relational model onto object model. Implementing a database 
application in the context of the web. Web services. Server -side scalability. Virtualization. Cloud Computing. 
Prerequisite modules: Computer Science 214  
Prerequisite modules for programmes in Engineering:  
• Computer Science E 214  
• Computer Systems 245  
Home department:  Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science 



344 (16) Program Design (3L, 3P)  
Program specifications as guidelines for program design; reusable frameworks for program design; 
testability of program designs; development of a medium- sized system to illustrate the practical application 
of the principles of program design.  
Prerequisite modules: Computer Science 214  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science 


Subject: 56847 Financial M athematics 





378 (32) Financial Mathematics (3L, 3T)  
Matrix algebra and matrix differentiation. Taylor’ s theorem for functions of more than one variable, differential 
equations and numerical methods, Riemann -Stieltjes integrals, introduction to measure and probability 
spaces, Radon -Nikodym derivatives, L2 spaces and Hilbert spaces, mathematical modelling of financial 
markets, the Black -Scholes model.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics  244 
Prerequisite modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics  245 
• Mathematical Statistics  246 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics 


Subject: 11788  Machine Learning  





441 (16) Machine Learning (2L)  
This module is an introduction to selected topics in machine learning.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Computer Science 144  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Computer Science 


Subject: 21539 Mathematics 





114 (16) Calculus (5L, 2T)  
Any student who wishes to take this module must have achieved a mark of at least 6 (or 70%) for Mathematics in the NSC or the IEB’s school -leaving certificate. 
Induction and the binomial theorem. Functions, limits and continuity; derivatives and rules of differentiation; applications of differentiation; the definite and indefinite integral; integration of elementary functions.  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics Economic and Management Sciences  
222 
 


144 (16) Calculus and Linear Alge bra (5L, 2T)  
Complex numbers; transcendental functions; techniques of integration; improper integrals; conic sections; 
polar co- ordinates; partial derivatives; introduction to matrices and determinants.  
Prerequisite module: Mathematics 114  
Home department:  Mathematical Sciences, Division  Mathematics 



214 (16) Advanced Calculus and Linear Algebra (4L, 2T)  
Advanced Calculus: Functions of more than one real variable, multiple integrals, line integrals, surface 
integrals, the divergence theorem.  
Linear algebra:  Vectors in n dimensions: linear transformations of real vector spaces and their matrices; 
geometric transformations: rotation, reflection, dilation, projection; composition of transformations. General 
real vector spaces: subspaces, linear independence, basis, dimension; rank and nullity of a matrix. General 
inner -product matrices; orthogonality, orthonormal bases, projections, the Gram -Schmidt process; QR 
factorisation of a matrix; least squares approximations; orthogonal matrices.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 114  
• Mathematics  144 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics 



244 (16) Analysis and Linear Algebra (4L, 2T)  
Analysis:  Improper integrals, sequences and series, power series and Taylor's theorem, second -order linear 
differential equations.  
Linear algebra:  Eigenvalues and eigenvectors, diagonalisation of a real matrix; orthogonal diagonalis ation; 
linear transformations of general real vector spaces; matrix representation of linear transformations between general finite dimensional vector spaces; change of basis; systems of first -order differential equations and 
other applications.  
Prerequisi te module: Mathematics 214  
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics 



314 (16) Algebra (3L, 3T)  
This module is an introduction to the basic axiomatic structures of algebra. These structures provide the 
natural surroundings for the discuss ion of many of the most important results in number theory, algebraic 
geometry and computational algebra. Among others, the following are studied: groups, rings, residue classes modulo n, quotient rings and fields, rings of polynomials, Euclidean domains, unique factorisation domains, 
extensions of fields, applications to straight -edge and compass constructions, finite fields and their 
applications.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics  244 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics 



324 (16) Complex Analysis (3L, 3T)  
Types of sets in C , convergence of series, point wise and uniform convergence of sequences and series of 
functions, paths, Cauchy -Riemann equations, determination of the radius of convergence and coefficients of 
a power series, the complex exponential and trigonometric functions, arguments, complex logarithms and 
exponentiation, integration of continuous functions along piecewise smooth paths, Cauchy’s theorem and 
formula, Taylor series expansion of differentiable functions, analytic functions, zeros, Liouville’s theorem, 
proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Laurent series, identification and classification of isolated 
singularities, calculation of residues, the Residue theorem, applications.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics  244 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics Economic and Management Sciences 
223 
 


344 (16) Discrete Mathematics (3L, 3T)  
Discrete Mathematics, or “Concrete Mathematics”, as it is called in a famous book, deals with concrete 
objects that are inherently discrete, such as permutations, sets, trees and words. Emphasis will be placed on 
enumeration techniques. An introduction to elementary number theory will also be presented. In this part of 
the module, classical topics such as Fermat’s theorem, Wilson's theorem or Lagrange’s theorem on sums of four squares are treated.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics  244  
or equivalent modules 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics 



345 (16) Lo gic (2L, 4T)  
Out of the four tutorial periods, two are scheduled tutorials and two are for independent work on assignments 
This module gives an introduction to mathematical logic and formal mathematical languages, with a special 
emphasis on those languages that can be used for foundation of mathematics. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 114  
• Mathematics  144  
or equivalent modules 
Home department:  Mathematical Sciences, Division  Mathematics 



365 (16) Real Analysis (3L, 3T)  
Some concepts and results from real analysis will be covered. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics  244 
Home department: Mathematical Sciences, Division Mathematics 
Department of Mercantile Law (Faculty of Law)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Law, see the Yearbook  part for 
the Faculty of Law. 


Subject: 35998 Mercantile Law (Commerce)  





253 (8) Mercantile Law (Commerce) (3L, 1T)  
Basic principles of  law of insolvency and entrepreneurial law.  
Prerequisite pass module: Mercantile Law (Acc) 193  
Home department: Mercantile Law 



285 (32) Mercantile Law (Commerce) (3L, 1T)  
Sources of South African Law and fundamental concepts; law of obligations (law of contracts; law of delict; 
agency); law of insolvency; employment law; basic principles of entrepreneurial law.  
Notes:  
Students who have passed Mercantile Law (Acc) 193 do not register for Mercantile Law (Commerce) 285, but 
register for Mercantile  Law (Commerce) 253.  
Home department: Mercantile Law 
 Economic and Management Sciences 
224 
 Special modules in Mercantile Law for BCom (International Business)  


Subject: 13352 Legal Aspects of International Transactions  





314 (12) Legal Aspects of International Transactions (2L)  
This module provides a general introduction to law for commerce students and explains how the law 
regulates international business transactions. Emphasis is placed on the risks of doing business 
internationally and how the law can  address these risks. A capita selecta of legal aspects pertaining to 
international business transactions will be discussed, such as the law relating to the international sale of 
goods, methods of payment in international transactions; international carriage of goods and insurance; 
international partnership, agency and distributorship agreements; intellectual property law; legal aspects of 
e-commerce; competition law; dispute resolution; white collar crime; environmental protection; as well as 
labour and human rights implications of international business transactions.  
Home department: Mercantile Law 
Special modules in Mercantile Law for BAcc Students  


Subject: 58432 Mercantile Law (Acc)  





193 (24) Mercantile Law (Accounting) (3L, 1T)  
Sources of South African l aw and fundamental concepts; general principles of contract law, agency, specific 
contracts (sale, lease and credit agreements)  and an introduction to consumer protection; labour law and 
economic empowerment; access to information  and protection of personal information; legal principles in 
respect of money and payment (security; electronic instruments of payment, cryptocurrencies and money 
laundering).   
Home department: Mercantile Law 



292 (21 ) Mercantile Law (Accounting) (3L) 
The l egal principles regarding companies, close corporations, trusts and partnerships.  
Prerequisite module: Mercantile Law (Acc) 193  
Home department: Mercantile Law 
Department of Modern Foreign Languages (Faculty of Arts and 
Social Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 11302 Chinese  





178 (24)  Introduction to the Chinese Language and Culture (3L, 1P, 1T)  
Introductory language study, including phonetics.  
Introduction to contemporary China based on a selection of topics. 
Note:  
Chinese 178 is a module for beginners. No previous knowledge of Chinese is required. The module is 
designed to provide basic intercultural communication skills. It enables students to understand, speak, read 
and, to a lesser degree, write contemporary Chinese in everyday situations, which includes a basic knowledge of the present -day situation in China.  
Home department: Modern F oreign Languages  Economic and Management Sciences 
225 
 

Subject: 13145 French  





178 (24)  Introduction to the French Language and Culture (3L, 1P, 1T) 
For students without French in Grade 12.  
Introductory language studies. 
Introduction to contemporary French culture and French -speaking societies on the basis of selected topics.  
Study of elementary literary texts.  
Home department: Modern Foreign Languages 



188 (24)  Intermediate Study of the French Language, Literature and Culture (4L) 
For students with French in Grade 12.  
Intermediate language studies with particular emphasis on vocabulary.  
French and Francophone literary texts. 
Home department: Modern Foreign Languages 


Subject: 26107 German  





178 (24)  Introduction to the German Language and Culture (3L, 1P, 1T)  
For stud ents without German in Grade 12.  
Introductory language study.  Introduction to contemporary culture on the basis of selected topics.  
Analysis of texts related to these topics.  
Home department: Modern Foreign Languages 



188 (24) German Language, Literature and Culture of the 20th and 21st Centuries  
(3L, 1T)  
For students with German in Grade 12.  
A cultural -historical overview of the period on the basis of selected topics.  
Analysis of texts related to these topics.  
Intermediate language studies.  
Home department: Modern Foreign Languages 
Department of Philosophy (Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 12882 Philosophy  





114 (12)  Introduction to Systematic Philosophy (3L, 1T) 
Systematic study of the nature, methods and aims of philosophy as a distinctive discipline.  
Basic concepts of logic (truth, validity, soundness, deductive and inductive argumentation, the principle of 
non- contradiction, logical form and basic patterns in argumentation, etc.).  
Meaning and language use; disputes and definitions; recognising fallacies; the manipulation of language and 
meaning; rhetorical strategies.  
Exercises in the analysis of reasoning.  
Home department: Philosophy  Economic and Management Sciences 
226 
 


144 (12)  Introduction to Mor al Reasoning (3L, 1T)  
The Greek Enlightenment and the most prominent Ancient Greek philosophers, most notably Socrates, Plato 
and Aristotle.  
The intersection of Greek and Judeo -Christian thought in Late Antiquity.  
The nature of moral problems and an overview of important approaches to moral reasoning (e.g. 
consequentialism, rule morality, human rights, virtue ethics).  
Home department: Philosophy  



214 (16) Subdisciplines in Philosophy I (3L, 1T) 
Systematic study of questions relating to specific philosophical disciplines, namely epistemology, philosophy of science and/or aesthetics.  
Note:  
Two of the three disciplines are taught in any given year.  
Home department: Philosophy  



244 (16) Subdisciplines in Philosophy II  (3L, 1T) 
Systematic study of questions relating to specific philosophical disciplines, namely philosophy of religion, 
philosophy of mind, and/or applied ethics.  
Note:  
Two of the three disciplines are taught in any given year.  
Home department: Philosophy  
Department of Political Science (Faculty of Arts and Social 
Sciences)   
Note:  For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the F aculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 44687 Political Science  





114 (12)  Introduction to Political Science and South African Politics (2L, 0.5T)  
The module is an introduction to the academic discipline of Political Science. It covers key concepts, theories, models and debates in the discipline. Following the conceptual and theoretical introduction it moves on to discuss the political development of, as well as politics in contemporary South Africa. 
Home department: Political Science  



144 (12)  Introduction to International Relations and African Politics (2L, 0.5T)  
An overview of the most important actors, structures and processes in the global system. Students will be 
familiarised with some practical as well as theoretical chall enges related to the study and analysis of 
International Relations (IR), with particular attention to the African context.  
Home department: Political Science 



212 (8) Political Behaviour (1.5L, 0.5T) 
A study of the way that figures and institutions with authority transfer political values and the way that these 
values eventually become part of the political culture. In some cases certain people question the existing 
values and become involved in political protest and violence. The latter phenomena, as well as tolerance and conventional political participation, are studied.  
Home department: Political Science 



222 (8) The Global Political Economy (1.5L, 0.5T)  
A study of the dynamic interaction between politics and economics, with specific focus on the structures  of 
the global political economy (trade, finance, production, knowledge and security), global governance 
institutions and on the tension between state and market institutions; perspectives adopted in the study of 
this field; South Africa in the global political economy.  
Home department: Political Science Economic and Management Sciences 
227 
 


242 (8) Political Development (1.5L, 0.5T)  
The analysis of the state, economy and development in Asia, Africa and/or Latin America based on case 
studies and comparative themes.  
Home department: Political Science 



252 (8) Foreign Policy Analysis (1.5L, 0.5T)  
Offers an introduction and survey of the purpose and development of foreign policy, foreign policy analysis, the interaction with domestic policy questions, the role of different actors in foreign policy and the impact 
that issues at regional and global levels have, with specific reference to South Africa and/or other countries 
or regions.  
Home department: Political Science 



324 (12)  Comparative Politics (2L, 0.5T)  
Theories related to the comparison of political economic systems. Contemporary tendencies in Africa and other regions. Patterns of democratisation and electoral politics. 
Home department: Political Science 
Department of Private Law (Faculty of Law)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Law , see the Yearbook  part for 
the Faculty of Law . 
Department of Psychology (Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the  Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 18414 Psychology  





114 (12)  Psychology as a Science (2L, 1T)  
This module is an introduction to psychology both as a science and a profession, with specific emphasis on 
psychological issues that are relevant in the South African context. Psychology is positioned at the convergence of a number of traditions of research and practice, including biological, philosophical and 
pragmatic traditions. This introductory module gives students a basis from which to approach further study of the discipline. 
Home department: Psychology  



144 (12)  Psyc hology in Context (2L, 1T)  
In this module the basic principles in psychology are applied in order to understand the person in context, 
with particular reference to core social issues and challenges facing South African society.  
Home department: Psychology  



213 (8) Approaches to Psychological Theories of the Person (1.5L)  
This module addresses psychological theories and understandings of the person with reference to major contemporary approaches. Theories to be considered may include systemic, psychodynamic, behavioural, cognitive and existential components, with consideration of the applicability of psychological theories to 
African contexts.  
Prerequisite  pass modules:  
• Psychology 114  
• Psychology 144 
Home department: Psychology  Economic and Management Sciences 
228 
 


223 (8) Human Development in Context (1.5L) 
In this module human development is studied, with specific reference to the South African context.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Psychology 114  
• Psychology 144 
Home department: Psychology  



243 (8) Research Design in Psychology (1.5 L) 
This module will equip students with knowledge and skills to evaluate the scientific literature in psychology. 
The module covers the core theoretical elements of both quantitative and qualitative research methodology using examples of current psychosoci al issues.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Psychology 114  
• Psychology 144 
Home department: Psychology  



253 (8) Data Analysis in Psychology (1.5L)  
This module focuses on the statistical procedures that are commonly used in psychological research. The module will equip students with knowledge and skills to analyse quantitative data and to interpret statistical 
results. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Psychology 114  
• Psychology 144 
Home department: Psychology  



314 (12)  Psychopathology (4L)  
In this module abnormal behaviour is studied, from different perspectives and classification systems, with 
specific reference to the mental health context in South Africa. Three of the following prerequisite pass modules: Psychology 213, Psychology 223, Psychology 243, 
Psychology 253 
Home department: Psychology  



324 (12)  Social Psychology (4L)  
In this module, theoretical and methodological developments in contemporary social psychology are 
presented. Social relationships and identity are investigated with reference to soci al categories like sex, race, 
ethnicity and sexual orientation, with emphasis on the South African context.  
Three of the following prerequisite pass modules: Psychology 213, Psychology 223, Psychology 243, 
Psychology 253 
Home department: Psychology  



348 (24 ) Psychological Interventions (4L)  
Psychologists operate in a range of contexts, from individual psychotherapies to community interventions. This module critically discusses the principles behind the contributions psychologists make to human health, 
develo pment and individual and collective well -being, with specific reference to the health and mental 
health context in contemporary South Africa. 
Three of the following prerequisite pass modules: Psychology 213, Psychology 223, Psychology 243, 
Psychology 253 
Home department: Psychology  
Department of Public Law (Faculty of Law)   
Note:  For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Law, see the Yearbook  part for 
the Faculty of Law. Economic and Management Sciences 
229 
 Department of Sociology and Social Anthropology (Faculty of Arts 
and Social Sciences)   
Note: For more information regarding the modules offered by the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, see the 
Yearbook  part for the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.  


Subject: 54186 Social Anthropology  





324 (12)  Culture, Power and Identity (2L, 0.5T)  
Nation- building and ethnicity. Assimilation, pluralism, multiculturalism in comparative perspective. Global 
inequalities and human rights. Difference and diversity in civil society.  
Corequisite modules: Sociology 1 and Social Anthropology 2, should Social Anthropology 3 be your major subject  
Home department: Sociology and Social Anthropology 


Subject: 19003 Sociology 





114 (12) Introduction to Sociology and Social Anthropology (3L) 
Introduction to conceptual and theoretical themes in sociology and social anthropology, including 
discussions on social inequality, social stratification, culture, identity (including gender, “race” and ethnicity), 
socialisation, and age in the context  of a life course perspective. Discussion themes are grounded in social 
theory and methodological approaches in the social sciences.  
Home department: Sociology and Social Anthropology 



144 (12) Social Issues in South Africa (3L)  
A selection of social issues that reflect the complexity of contemporary South African society. Examples of 
themes include: social change; poverty and development; social institutions such as the family, education and religion; crime and security; health, the body and HIV/ Aids ; political and economic relationships. 
Home department: Sociology and Social Anthropology 



212 (8) Poverty, Development and the Environment (1.5L, 0.5T)  
Debates on the causes and meaning of poverty, inequality and development; critical thinking on underdevelopment and " sustainable development "; and the environment.  
Home department: Sociology and Social Anthropology 



222 (8) Social Identity and Inequality (1.5L, 0.5T) 
Sociological understandings of the intersection of race, gender, sexuality, class and age as sources of identification, dimensions of power, and inequality in South Africa and elsewhere.  
Home department: Sociology and Social Anthropology 



242 (8) Sociology of Communication (1.5L, 0.5T) 
An introduction to communication and media as a broad domain of  enquiry; the social implications of 
information and communication technologies; the internet and networked societies; the particular role that 
digital technologies play in the mediation of ideas about social organization, from the local to the global. 
Hom e department: Sociology and Social Anthropology  



252 (8) Industrial Sociology (1.5L, 0.5T) 
Central concepts, themes and debates within the field of industrial sociology, including an assessment of 
how work has changed through different eras; different interpretations of work and the impact of 
globalisation on the transformation of work; workplace restructuring, employment practices; trade unions and the management of conflict within the workplace in South Africa. 
Home department: Sociology and Social Anthrop ology Economic and Management Sciences 
230 
 Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science  


Subject: 43214 Actuarial Science  





112 (8) Theory of Interest (2L, 1T)  
Simple and compound interest. Force of interest. Future value, present value and discount. Accumulation 
and discounting of amounts of money. Various types of annuities and applications. 
Notes:  
• This module is more intensive than Theory of Interest 152.  
• For admission to the module students must h ave passed Grade 12 Mathematics with a mark of at 
least 70% (symbol 6 or Higher Grade B).  
• Students are required to complete at least 80% of all assigned classwork/tutorials. In cases where 
this requirement is not met, students will fail the module.  
Home de partment: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



142 (16) Introduction to Actuarial Science (3L, 1T) 
Actuarial mathematical methods and models, principles of life contingencies, life insurance, general insurance, investments, employee benefits, healthcare financing and new trends with specific reference to 
the South African insurance industry. Actuarial professionalism and ethics.  
Note:  
Students are required to complete at least 80% of all assigned classwork/tutorials. In cases where this 
requirement is not met, students will fail the module.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematics 114 with a final mark of at least 60%  
• Actuarial Science 112  
Corequisite module: Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



211 (18) Financial Mathematics (4L) 
Basic concepts of financial mathematics, compound interest functions, discounted cash flows, pricing of 
loans and other securities, annuities, as well as the use of MS Excel to perform calculations.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Probability  Theory and Statistics 144 with a final mark of at least 65%  
• Mathematics 114 and Mathematics 144, with an average final mark of at least 60%  for the two 
together , or Mathematics 214 with a final mark of at least 55 % 
Corequisite modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematics 214  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



241 (22) Actuarial Models (5L)  
Survival models and their application to actuarial work, including the use of computer software to perform 
calculations.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Actuarial Science 211  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Probability Theory and Statistics 144 with a final mark of at least 65%  
• Mathematics 114 and  Mathematics 144, with an average final mark of at least 60%  for the two 
together , or Mathematics 214 with a final mark of at least 55%  
Corequisite modules:  
• Actuarial Science 142  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistic s 246 
• Mathematics 244  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences  
231 
 


311 (24) Actuarial Statistics  (5L) 
Mathematical and statistical techniques of particular relevance to actuarial work, including the use of 
computer software to perform calculations. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Actuarial Science 142  
• Actuarial Science 211  
• Actuarial Science 241  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics 244 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



341 (24) Contingencies  (5L) 
Mathematical te chniques used to model and value cash flows dependent on death, survival or other 
uncertain risks, including the use of computer software to perform calculations.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Actuarial Science 142  
• Actuarial Science  211 
• Actuarial Science  241 
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics  246 
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics 244 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



371 (32) Financial Engineering  (4L) 
Stochastic asset -liability modelling and the valuation of financial derivatives, including the use of computer 
software to perform calculations.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Actuarial Science 142  
• Actuarial Science 211  
• Actuarial Scien ce 241 
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics 244 
Corequisite modules:  
• Actuarial Science 311  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathematical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statistics 364  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences 
232 
 

Subject: 10394 Bayesian Statistics   





441 (12) Bayesian Statistics (2L ) 
For this course, the objective is to offer a Bayesian approach to statistical modelling. The basic principles of 
Bayesian statistics will be introduced as well as the use of Monte Carlo methods to estimate posterior 
distributions and their associated quantities. Several statistical learning topics on both regression and classification (including logistic regression, nai ve classification, linear regression, model selection and 
variable selection techniques such as ridge and lasso) will be approached from a Bayesian perspective and compared with their frequentis t counterparts. The course will thereby aim to illustrate some of the benefits 
of the Bayesian approach.  
Prerequisite pass modules:   
• Mathematical Statistics 312,  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathematical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statis tics 364 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 14026 Data Science  





141 (16) Data Science (4L; 2P)  
Fundamental data science concepts; data -analytic thinking; types of data; the data cycle; CRISP data mining 
process; describing a dataset numerically; describing a dataset graphically; organising data; file formats; data 
manipulation in R software; introduction to predictive modelling; overfitting; data leakage; model evaluation; 
other data science tasks and techniques; data ethics; communicating results. 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



241 (16) Data Science (4L, 2P)  
Introduction to Python ; Python  commands and file systems; programming structures; data sources; data 
collection; optimisation; resampling and the bootstrap; na ive Bayes classification; a pplication of linear 
models; data ethics.  
Prerequisite pass modules :  
• Data Science 141  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  or Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or Probability Theory and 
Statistics 144 with a final mark of at least 60%  
Prerequisite module:  Mathematical Statistics 214  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



316 (16) Data Science (4L, 2P)  
In this module approaches to supervised and unsupervised machine learning are discussed.  
Supervised learning uses labelled datasets and can be separated into two types of problems, namely  
classification and regression. Classification  problems can be solved by a multivariate technique, namely  
discriminant analysis that separates two or more groups of observations based on variables measured on  
each sample unit. The  naïve Bayes classifier is another effective classification algorithm for  discriminat ing 
between two or more groups. To measure the classification accuracy of these  techniques, cross validation 
and bootstrap resampling procedures are also  discussed. In regression  problems the relationship between 
dependent and independent variables is investigated. Popular regression  algorithms are regularized 
regression, principal component regression and partial least squares regression.  For classification and 
regression problems, tree- based methods, such as random forests and boosting, can  also be applied as 
modelling techniques.  
Unsupervised learnin g uses unlabelled datasets and is associated with tasks in clustering and dimensionality  
reduction. Clustering is done according to  a similarity measure for group ing data objects together. Modern 
clustering techniques such as k -means, Gaussian mixture mode ls and spectral clustering  are discussed. 
Dimensionality reduction is the statistical technique of reducing the number of random  variables  in a 
problem by obtaining a set of principal variables. Specifically, principal component analysis and independent 
component analysis are discussed.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Data Science 241  
Corequisite module:  Mathematical Statistics 312  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences 
233 
 


346 (16) Data Science (4L, 2P)  
In this module big data and deep learning are discussed.  
Big data refers to data that is so large, fast or complex that it is difficult or impossible to process using 
traditional methods. The challenges of b ig data analysis include capturing, storing, searching, sharing, 
transferring, visualising, querying and updating of data sources.  
Cloud computing services are also used to manage big data. Cloud computing is the on -demand availability 
of computer system resources, especially data storage and computing power, without direct active management by the user.   
Natural language processing, a subfield of linguistics, computer science and artificial intelligence, is also 
applied to big data. Natural language processing is concerned with the interactions between computers and 
human language, in particular how to program computers to process and analyse large amounts of natural language data so that the computer can automatically perform repetitive tasks.   
Neural networks are a subset of machine learning and  are at  the heart of deep learning algorithms. Neural 
networks rely on training data to learn and improve the accuracy of the network over time. Once the network is fine -tuned for accuracy, using backpropagation, it is utilised as a powerful tool to classify and cluster data 
at a high velocity.  
Prerequisite modules: 
• Data Science 316 
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 14697  Data Science Research in Statistical Learning  





471 (40) Data Science Research Assignment  
The research assignment provides students with a comprehensive learning experience that integrates 
knowledge from previous courses.  Students  will integrate knowledge and experiences gained from all 
previous modules and apply th ese to a data -rich research topic.  They  will have the opportunity to synthesise 
what they have learned and apply that knowledge to new, complex situations. Students shou ld engage in 
the entire process of solving a real -world data science problem, from collecting and processing actual data, 
and applying suitable and appropriate analytic methods to the problem , to communicating the results clearly  
and comprehensibly.  
Prere quisite pass modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathematical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statistics 364  
• Data Science 3 46 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 59498 Engineering Statistics  





314 (15) Engineering Statistics (3L, 2.5T)  
Applied probability theory; applications based on discrete and continuous random variables and their 
probability distributions, such as the normal, gamma, lognormal, log- Pearson type 3 (LP3), Gumbel (EV1) 
distributions; queuing processes; joint distributions; descriptive statistics and graphical presentations; 
moments, averages, median and standard deviations; moment generating functions; variation coefficient; skewness coefficient; peaking coefficient; sampling theory; point and interval estimation; hypothesis testing; 
μ2 and K- S testing; simple linear and non -linear regression and correlation analyses; introduction to multiple 
linear regression; introduction to analysis of variance and experimental design.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Engineering Mathematics 115  
• Engineering Mathematics 145 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences 
234 
 

Subject: 54690 Financial Risk Management  


Financial Risk Management 


274(24) has since 2020 been replaced by Actuarial Science 211(18) in the first 
semester and Financial Risk Management 


252(6) in the second semester.  



212 (8) Institutional Investment Management (3L, 2P)  
Evaluating of the investment properties and the study of the mathematical methodology underlying the 
following financial asset classes: Government bonds, corporate debt, equity, properties, index linked 
government bonds, Foreign investments. South African financial market. Liabilities and risk profile of the 
following Institutional Inve stors: Banks, pension funds, medical aid schemes, unit trusts, investment trusts.  
Corporate finance: Financial instruments to raise finance and manage financial risk.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Mathematics 114  
• Mathematics 144  
• Probabi lity Theory and Statistics 144  
Corequisite modules:  
• Actuarial Science 211  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



242 (8) Derivatives (3L, 2P)  
Introduction to derivatives with emphasis on mathematical methodology; Mechanics of futures and option 
markets; Pricing of Futures and Forwards; Hedging strategies using derivatives; Interest Rate Markets; Swaps; 
Properties of stock options; Trading strategies involving options.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Mathematics 114  
• Mathematics 144  
• Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Prerequisite module: Financial Risk Management 212  
Corequisite modules:  
• Actuarial Science 211  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



252 (6) Financial Mathematical Statistics (3L)  
Analyses of financial returns, Principal components, Risk factor sensitivities and cash flow mapping.  
Introduction to programming. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Actuarial Science 112  
• Mathematics 114  
• Mathematics 144  
• Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
Corequisite modules:  
• Actuarial Science 211  
• Financial Risk Management 212  
• Financial Risk Management 242  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics 244  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences 
235 
 


314 (24) Financial Mathematical Statistics 4L, 2T  
Binomial trees; statistical modelling of stock prices, mathematical statistical derivation of Black -Scholes 
model and its applications; options on stock indices, currencies and futures; Greek letters; value at risk; 
numerical procedures to value derivatives; exotic options. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Financial  Risk Management 212  
• Financial Risk Management 242  
• Financial Risk Management 252  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics 244  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
Corequisite module: Actuarial Science 211 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



344 (24) Modern Portfolio Theory (4L, 2T)  
Mean variance portfolio theory: Risk of a portfolio, delineating efficient portfolios, techniques for calculating 
the efficient frontier. The portfolio selection process, single and multi -index models, utility analysis. Models of 
equilibrium in the capital market: Standard capital asset pricing model, non -standard forms of capital asset 
pricing models, empirical tests of equilibrium models. 
Prerequisite module: Fin ancial Risk Management 314  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 14289 Introduction to Statistical Learning   





441 (12) Introduction to Statistical Learning (2L ) 
Objectives and content: Statistical Learning is a collective noun for a variety of techniques that can be used 
to identify, describe, and model patterns and trends in data sets. Some of these techniques are well 
established in traditional statistics, for example regression analysis and discriminant analysis, while others 
have become feasible because of the ready availability of computing power. Examples of the latter are support vector machines, neural networks, and recommender systems, all of which are discussed in the 
module. The module strikes a balance between a study of these and other specific methods on the one hand 
and the underlying fundamentals on the other. Regularisation, optimisation, and the curse -of-dimensionality 
and ways of combatting it, are important concepts that are emphasise d throughout the module.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Data Science 3 16 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 22853 Mathematical Statistics 





214 (16) Distribution Theory and Introduction to Statistical Inference (4L, 2P)  
Continuous stochastic variables; expected value and variance of a continuous stochastic variable; important 
continuous distributions; uniform, normal, exponential, gamma, beta. Moments and moment generating 
functions for discrete and continuous distributions. Bivariate probability distributions; marginal and 
conditional distributions; the multinomial and bivariate normal distribution; determining the distribution of 
functions of variables. The central limit theorem (without proof). Samples and sampling distributions: the 
standard parametric cases. Interval estimation and hypothesis testing: applying these principles in the standard cases of parametric inference. Data representation and description, calculating and interpreting 
sample measures.  
Prerequisite pass modules: 
• Probability Theory and Statistics 114 or Probability Theory and Statistics 144  
• Mathematics 114 and  Mathematics 144, with an average final mark of at least 60%  for the two 
together , or Mathematics 214 with a final mark of at least 55%  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences  
236 
 


245 (8) Statistical Inference (2L, 1P)  
Introduction to statistical inference. Principles of point estimation: efficiency, minimum variance unbiased 
estimators, consistency. Method of moments estimators. Maximum likelihood estimators. The Neyman -
Pearson lemma: proof and applications. Likelihood ratio tests. Parametric estimation theory and hypothesis 
testing. Bayesian inferential statistics.  
Prerequisite pass module: Mat hematical Statistics 214  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



246 (8) Linear Models in Statistics (2L, 1P)  
Advanced matrix algebra. Stochastic vectors and matrices. The multivariate normal distribution. Maximum 
likelihood estimation of parameters in the multivariate normal distribution.  Distributions of quadratic forms. 
The simple linear regression model. The method of least squares. Inference in the simple linear regression 
model. Introduction to R software. 
Prerequisite pass module: Mathemati cal Statistics 214  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



312 (16) Statistical Inference and Probability Theory (3L, 1P) 
Advanced distribution theory, sequences of random variables, limit theory for sequences, generating 
functions, sampling distributions and approximations. Sufficiency. Different approaches to inference. Goodness -of-fit methods. Bayes inference: Decision the ory and Bayes risk using loss functions, Bayesian 
belief networks and Bayesian classification. Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation techniques: Gibbs 
sampling and Metropolis -Hasting algorithms.  
Prerequisite pass module: Mathematical Statistics 245  
Prerequis ite modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 246 with a final mark of at least 40%  
• Mathematics 214  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



316 (16) Regression and Predictive Modelling (3L, 1P)  
Fitting regression models by means of matrices. The multiple  linear regression model. Inference in the 
multiple linear regression model. Residual analysis. Variable selection techniques. Ridge regression. Lasso 
regression. Linear methods for classification.  The use of R software to fit models in practice.  
Prerequis ite pass module: Mathematical Statistics 246  
Prerequisite modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 245 with a final mark of at least 40%  
• Mathematics 214  
• Mathematics 244 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



344 (16) Stochastic Processes and Statistical Learning  (3L, 1P)  
Introduction to stochastic processes. Markov processes and their applications. Introduction to martingale 
theory and applications. Introduction to statistical learning. 
Prerequisite modules :  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



364 (16) Time Series (3L, 1P)  
Stationarity, filters for time series, autoregressive, moving average, autoregressive moving average and 
autoregressive integrated moving average time series, shift operators for time series, model identification 
and estimation and diagnostic testing of time series, non -stationarity of time series. Applications of time 
series.  
Prerequisite module:  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences 
237 
 

Subject: 14373 Multivariate Statistical Analysis A   





441 (12) Multivariate Statistical Analysis A (3L) 
The objective of the module is to teach students the theoretical basis and practical application of 
multivariate statistics. Various aspects of multivariate statistics are discussed. Students learn mathematical 
theory supporting multivariate statistics, and the application of these statistics. T he consequences of the 
assumptions made on multivariate statistics are also considered. In particular, the following topics are 
studied: the characteri sation and display of multivariate data; matrix algebra and random vectors; the 
multivariate normal distribution; inferences about the multivariate population mean vector.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathematical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statistics 364  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 14374 Multivariate Statistical Analysis B   





441 (12) Multivariate Statistical Analysis B  (3L) 
The objective of the module is to provide students with the expertise to confidently come to the right 
conclusions when analysing multivariate data. Students will study the theory and applications of the following multivariate statistical techniques: m ultivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), m ultivariate multiple 
regression analysis, p rincipal component analysis, f actor analysis, c anonical correlation analysis, d iscriminant 
and classification analysis, c luster analysis, d istance and o rdination methods.  
Application to multivariate datasets will be performed using the SAS and R software. 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathematical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statistics 364  
• Multivariate Statistical Analysis  A 441 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 56820 Probability Theory and Statistics  





144 (16) Probability Theory and Statistics (3L, 3T) 
Combinatorial analysis; the basic counting principles; permutatio ns and combinations. Random phenomena; 
sample spaces and events; the probability axioms; the probability of an event; random selection; probability 
rules; conditional probability; the rule of Bayes; stochastic independence. Discrete and continuous stochastic 
variables; expected value and variance of a stochastic variable; important discrete distributions: binomial, Poisson, geometric, hypergeometric, negative binomial; important continuous distributions, uniform, normal  
Home department: Statistics and Actua rial Science  Economic and Management Sciences 
238 
 

Subject: 19658 Statistics  


Note:  
To major in Statistics for a BCom degree, the modules Statistics and Data Science 188, Statistics 214, 224, 244 
and Statistics 318, 348 are required.  



214 (16) Applied Statistics (3L, 2T)  
Descriptive statistics:  Various data types; f requency distributions; c ontingency tables; graphical representation 
of different data types; m easures of location and spread; box-and-whisker plot. 
Discrete stochastic variables and probability distributions:  Expected value, variance and standard deviation of a 
discrete stochastic variable; correlation between discrete stochastic variables; joint, marginal and conditional 
distributions; distribution of the sum of variables; b inomial and Poisson distributions. 
Continuous stochastic variables and probability distributions: Expected value, variance and standard deviation 
of a continuous stochastic variable. 
Distributions:  Uniform, normal, exponential, gamma, t, F, chi square and beta.  
Sampling distributions:  The central limit theorem; sampling distributions of one mean; one proportion and one 
variance; sampling distributions of the difference between two means and the difference between two 
proportions; sampling distributions of the ratio of two variances.  
Inferential statistics:  Interval estimation and hypothesis testing for one mean, one proportion and one 
variance; Interval estimation and hypothesis testing for the difference between two means, the difference 
between two proportions and the ra tio of two variances; c oncept and calculation of p values in above cases; 
determining sample sizes; c alculation of power and the effect of sample size on it.  
Categorical data analysis : Hypothesis testing for the difference between two or more proportions; t ests for 
independence; the goodness of fit test.  
Note:  
Application of statistical techniques using Microsoft® Excel is emphasised throughout.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  Statistics and Data Science 188  or Probability Theory and Statistics 114  or 
Probability  Theory and Statistics 144  
Corequisite module: Statistics 


224 (Students who have passed Mathematics 114 or  Mathematics 144 are 
exempt from this.)  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



224 (16) Statistical Theory and Practice (3L, 2T) 
Handling data sets: Data vectors and data matrices; different types of data and its influence on the choice of applicable statistical techniques; manipulations with data vectors and data matrices; calculating simple 
statistical measures with the use of vectors and matrices; the R programming language; importing data into 
R; vector and matrix operations in R to calculate statistical measures; determinant and eigenvalues of a square matrix with applications in statistics.  
Moment generating functions and thei r applications: Moments of a random variable; calculation and 
interpretation of discrete and continuous moments with summation and integration; the exponential function and some of its basic properties; the moment generating function; moment generating fun ctions of important 
distributions; obtaining moments from moment generating functions using differentiation and a series 
expansion; graphical displays of probability distributions in  R (the denstrip  package).  
Transformations : The logarithmic and square root transformations and their usage and effect in the analysis 
of data. 
Optimisation in statistics: Obtaining the maximum and minimum of a function of a single variable using 
differentiation; the least squares method; the maximum likelihood method (in genera l); Lagrange multipliers.  
Transformations : The logarithmic and square root transformations and their usage and effect in the analysis 
of data. 
Prerequisite pass module: Statistics and Data Science 188  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences  
239 
 


244 ( 16) Statistical Inference (3L, 2T) 
Sampling techniques:  Simple random sampling; stratified sampling; systematic sampling; c luster sampling; 
probability proportional to size sampling.  
Properties of estimators:  Unbiasedness; efficiency; consistency; sufficiency; robustness.  
Estimation methods:  Maximum likelihood  and optimisation of linear models . 
Simple linear regression analysis: The simple linear regression model; m ethod of least squares estimation; 
Inference on the model parameters and the correlation coefficient; r esidual analysis; p rediction intervals and 
confidence intervals. 
Multiple linear regression analysis:  The multiple linear regression model; residual analysis; i nference on the 
parameters of the model; r egression models with du mmy variables and interaction terms; p olynomial 
regression; transformations; collinearity; variable selection.  
Linear models for classification: Methods of estimation; i nference on the model parameters; evaluation of 
model performance; p rediction intervals  and confidence intervals.  
Analysis of variance: One - and two- factor ANOVA ; multiple comparisons testing.  
Non -parametric techniques for analysis of variance:  Wilcoxon’s rank sum test; t he sign test; Wilcoxon’s 
signed -rank test; Kruskal -Wallis test.  
Note:  
Application of statistical techniques using Microsoft® Excel and R are emphasised throughout.  
Prerequisite pass module: Statistics 214  
Prerequisite module: Statistics 224  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



318 (24) Linear and Econometric Models (4L, 2T) 
Regression analysis: The multiple linear regression model. Maximum likelihood estimators; r esidual analysis; 
outliers and influential observations; u nequal variances; multicollinearity; power transformations; variable 
selection; weighted least squares; l ogistic regression; r idge regression; r obust regression; p rincipal 
component regression; d ummy variables and ANOVA; l og-linear model; econometric models.  
Multivariate methods: Presentation of multivariate data; t he multivariate normal distribution; tests for 
normality; hypothesis testing for one and two population mean vectors; c onfidence regions and 
simultaneous confidence intervals; m ultivariate control charts; m ultivariate analysis of variance; l inear 
discriminan t analysis; The use of the software R, STATISTICA and SAS to apply regression analysis and 
multivariate methods to datasets.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Statistics 214  
• Statistics 224 
• Statistics 244  
or 
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Mathematical Statistics 214  
• Mathematical Statistics 245  
• Mathematical Statistics 246  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 



348 (24) Statistical Practice (4L, 2T)  
Probability theory:  Discrete probability distributions (the binomial, geometric, negative binomial, 
hypergeometric and Poisson distributions); m oments and moment generating functions; c ontinuous 
probability distributions (the normal, gamma and beta distributions); f unctions of random variables (the 
method of transformations, the method of moment generating functions, and order statistics).  
Advanced statistical inference: Properties of estimators (unbiasedness, efficiency, consistency, sufficiency, 
robustness); method -of-momen ts estimation; m aximum likelihood estimation; l ikelihood ratio tests.  
Time series analysis:  Time series decomposition methods; single exponential smoothing; Holt’s method; Holt-
Winter’s method; m ultiple regression in time series analysis; Box -Jenkins metho dology for ARIMA models; 
Using the R and STATISTICA software to apply time series models.  Economic and Management Sciences 
240 
 Stochastic simulation:  Generating random numbers from different distributions using R; i nverse transform 
method; acceptance -rejection method; p ractical applications of simulation using R.  
Bayesian inference:  Bayes’ theorem; Bayesian priors, posteriors and estimators; Bayesian credibility intervals; 
Bayes hypothesis testing.  
Prerequisite  module: Statistics 318  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 14223 Statistics and Data Science  





188 (18) Statistics and Data Science (3L) (2P)  
Linear programming : graphical techniques to solve problems with two variables; shadow prices; sensitivity 
analyses. (Only applies to BAcc students).  
Data science: fundamental concepts; the data cycle; data ethics.  
Descriptive statistics: various data types; graphical representation of data; descriptive measures of location, 
spread and association; box plots. 
Sampling techniques : simple rando m; stratified; systematic; cluster; probability proportional to size.  
Probability theory : basic probability concepts; Bayes’ theorem; counting rules. 
Discrete random variables and probability distributions: expected value, variance and standard deviation of a 
discrete random variable; covariance between discrete random variables; binomial, hypergeometric and 
Poisson distributions.  
Continuous random variables and probability distributions : expected value, variance and standard deviation of 
a continuous random variable; the uniform, normal and exponential distributions.  
Sampling distributions: central limit theorem; sampling distributions of the mean and a proportion; sampling 
distribution of the difference between two means and two proportions. 
Inferential statistics: interval estimation and hypothesis testing for the mean, a proportion, the variance and 
the standard deviation; interval estimation and hypothesis testing for the difference between two means, two 
proportions and the ratio of two variances. 
Regression analysis: the simple and multiple linear regression model; the method of least squares estimation; 
inference on the model parameters and coefficient of correlation; residual analysis.  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 65250 Stochastics Simulation   





441 (12) Stochastic Simulation (3L)  
The module is concerned with the study of the theory and applications of important probability models and 
stochastic processes and their application to simulation. T he simulation of random variables from well -
known distributions using techniques in mathematical statistics is followed by  applications thereof. These are 
studied theoretically/analytically and are then illustrated by means of computer -based simulation. In 
particular, the following topics are studied: methods for generating random variables from statistical 
distributions, Monte Carlo integration, Markov chains and Markov c hain Monte Carlo methods (including 
applications to Metropolis -Hastings and Gibbs sampling methods), homogeneous and non -homogeneous 
Poisson processes and variance reduction techniques for Monte Carlo integration.  
 Prerequisite pass modules:   
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathemat ical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statistics 364  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science Economic and Management Sciences 
241 
 

Subject: 38784 Theory of Interest  





152 (6) Theory of Interest (2L, 1T)  
Simple and compound interest. Force of interest. Future value, present value and discount. Accumulation 
and discounting of amounts of money. Various types of annuities and applications. 
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science 


Subject: 14309 Time Series Analysis   





441 (12) Time Series Analysis ( 3L) 
Data observed sequentially over time are very common. In time series analysis, the stochastic method that 
gives rise to an observed series is modelled and then used to forecast future values. This module is a continuation of previous time ser ies coursework and concentrates on more advanced time series techniques.   
Prerequisite pass modules:   
• Mathematical Statistics 312  
• Mathematical Statistics 316  
• Mathematical Statistics 344  
• Mathematical Statistics 364  
Home department: Statistics and Actuarial Science  
School of Accountancy   


Subject: 17426 Auditing  





288 (2 3) Auditing (2.5L)  
Introduction and background to a uditing; ethics and the legal liability of the auditor; the audit process (pre-
engagement a nd planning activities); basic principles of internal control; internal control cycles and the 
design thereof.  
Prerequisite module: Financial Accounting 178  or Financial Accounting  188 or Financial Accounting 179 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



378 (2 3) Auditing (2.5L)  
Continuation of Auditing 


288(24)/Auditing 388(24).  
Auditing in a computerised environment; the audit process (audit procedures, completion and reporting); audit sampling.  
Prerequisite module: Auditing 288  
Corequisite mo dule: Financial Accounting 278 or  Financial Accounting 288  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



388 (2 3) Auditing (2.5L)  
(Content the same as Auditing 288)  
Introduction and background to a uditing; ethics and the legal liability of the auditor; the audit process (pre -
engagement and planning activities); basic principles of internal control; internal control cycles and the design thereof.  
Prerequisite module: Financial Accounting 178  or Financial Accounting  188 or Financial Accounting 179 
Home department: School of Accountancy  Economic and Management Sciences 
242 
 

Subject: 59277 Business Ethics  





214 (8) Business Ethics (2L) 
Introduction to ethics, applied ethics, and ethical decision -making; macro -ethical issues in business ethics; 
contemporary approaches to corporate social responsibility and corporate governance; professionalism and 
ethics in accountancy; the nature and functioning of professional codes; ethical challenges associated with the accountancy functions (i.e. auditing, management and tax); management and organisational ethics; 
writing skills, research and case study analysis in applied ethics.  
Note:   
Business Ethics 214 is an exclusion subject with Business Ethics 314.  
Home department: School of Accountancy  


Subject: 14523 Digital and Leadership Acumen for A ccountants  


The full subject name is “Digital and Leadership Acumen for Accountants”, but “Digital and Leadership Acumen” is being used  in the  rest of th is Yearbook  part 



112 (6) Introduction to Digital Acumen for Accountants (2L) 
General information technology concepts for business systems  that include  general systems theory; 
infrastructure; networks and electronic communication; introduction to the development, management and 
control of information systems.  
Note:  
Students who failed Information Systems 114 in 2022 must register for both Digital and L eadership Acumen 
112 and 142 in 2023 or thereafter.  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



122 (6) Spreadsheet Software for Accountants (1L, 1P)  
The practical use of spreadsheet software in a business environment .  
Note:  
Students who failed Information Systems 144 in 2022 must register for both Digital and Leadership Acumen 
122 and 152 in 2023 or thereafter.  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



142 (6) Introduction to Accounting Software for Accountants (1L, 1P)  
Practical use of general accounting softw are in a business environment.  
Note:  
Students who failed Information Systems 114 in 2022 must register for  both Digital and Leadership Acumen 
112 and 142 in 2023 or thereafter.  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



152 (6) Introductory Spreadsheet Automation for Accountants (1L, 1P)  
The practical use of spreadsheet automation in a business environment.  
Note:  
Students who failed Information Systems 144 in 2022 must register for both Digital and Leadership Acumen 
122 and 152 in 2023 or thereafter.  
Prerequisite pass module: Information Systems 144 or  Digital and Leadership Acumen 1 22. 
Home department: School of Accountancy  Economic and Management Sciences  
243 
 


162 (6) Ethics, Finance and Operations in Digital Business Environments for 
Accountants (1L, 1P)  
The interaction of finance and business operations in a digital world. Ethics and dealing with ethical conflicts 
in a business environment.  
Note:  
Students who f ailed Information Systems 152 in 2022 must register for Digital and Leadership Acumen 162  in 
2023 or thereafter . 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



212 (6) Sustainable Business Models and Integrated Reporting for Accountants (1L, 1P)  
The module  uses a  case study methodology to develop a practical understanding of business model 
building blocks and integrated reporting. The role of responsible leadership in value creation is also explored.  
Note:  
Students who failed Information Systems 214 in 2022 must register for Digital and Leadership Acumen 2 12 in 
2023 or thereafter.  
Home department:  School of Accountancy  



242 (6) Accounting Software and Application Controls for Accountants (1L, 1P)  
The practical implementation and working of the controls in a computerised accounting information system. 
This module focuses on integration with Financial Accounting, Auditing and Taxation.  
Note:  
Students who failed Information Systems 242 in 2022 must register for Digital and Leadership Acumen 212  in 
2023 or therea fter. 
Corequisite module: Financial Accounting 178  or Financial Accounting  188 or Financial Accounting 179 
Prerequisite pass module: Information Systems 114 or  Digital and Leadership Acumen 142. 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



245 (8) Automation for Accountants  (1L, 2P) 
This practical module is designed to introduce accounting students to the fundamental principles of  
computer programming, with a focus on automating repetitive tasks commonly encountered by accountants  
when working with data in spreadsheets. The module  will cover key concepts including variables, conditional  
statements, scopes and loops, which will be explained and applied in the context of solving real -world 
problems in finance  and accounting.  
Throughout the module , students will be presented with a variety of use- cases demonstrating the practical  
applications of programming, including the automation of repetitive tasks within larger projects, as well as  
the creation of standalone programs designed to be re -executed p eriodically. These examples will be drawn  
from the field of finance  and accounting, enabling students to develop practical skills relevant to their future  
careers  as chartered accountants.  
In addition to learning programming fundamentals, the module  will emphasize problem -solving and  
program design, helping students develop the skills necessary to break down complex tasks into  
manageable components, and to create efficient, effective solutions to common problems. 
Prerequisite pass module: Information Syste ms 1 44 
or  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Digital and Leadership Acumen 122  
• Digital and Leadership Acumen 152  
Home department: School of Accountancy  
 Economic and Management Sciences 
244 
 


312(8) Introduction to Data Analytics for Accountants  (1L, 2P)  
A practical undergraduate introduction to the use of data analysis technology. Students are provided with 
relevant business and accounting scenarios and complex data that they must validate and use to perform 
data analysis to solve business and accounting problems relevant to chartered accountants. This core module complements and builds on Digital and Leadership Acumen 152 and 2 45 to create a basic 
understanding of business and accounting challenges and scenarios students will encounter in the course of 
their employment as future chartered accountants.  
Corequisite module: Management Accounting  278 
Prerequisite module:  Auditing 288  
Prerequisite pass module: Information Systems 144 on its own or Digital and Leadership Acumen 122 and 
Digital and Leadership Acumen 152  together . 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



352 (8) Data Analytics for Accountants  (1L, 2P) 
This is a practical undergraduate module building on data analytic skills required in Digital and Leadership 
Acumen 3 12. Students are provided with more complex business and accounting scenarios and the 
accompanying data  that they must validate and use for data analysis. This core module complements and 
builds on Digital and Leadership Acumen 3 12 by equipping students to use their basic knowledge of data 
analytics and the use of more advanced data analytic tools to perform and interpret more complex data 
analysis to solve business and accounting problems encountered in the course of their em ployment as 
future chartered accountants.  
Prerequisite pass module: Digital and Leadership Acumen 324  
Prerequisite module:  Management Accounting 2 78 
Home department: School of Accountancy  


Subject: 26883 Financial Accounting  





178 (24) Financial Accounting (4L)  
The accounting cycle; conceptual framework for financial reporting; value added tax ; selected International 
Financial Reporting Standards; accounting treatment of consignments; preparation an d presentation of 
financial statements of companies; and introduction to group statements.  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



188 (24) Financial Accounting (4L)  
Theoretical principles of International Financial Reporting Standards; accounting systems; preparation and 
presentation of financial statements for different enterprises.  
Note:  
Students who did not pass Accounting in their Grade 12 year must attend five lectures per week. 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



179 (26) Financial Accounting (4L, 1T)  
This module focusses on the theoretical principles of International Financial Reporting Standards and 
accounting systems as well as the preparation and presentation of financial statements for different 
enterprises. This module is equivalent to Financial Accounting 


188 (it covers all the same material, but some 
lectures and tutorials are taught separately). The focus on the separately taught lectures and tutorials will be supplementary conceptual development specifically for students that are part of the Faculty’s BCom 
(Management Sciences) Extended Curriculum  Programme.  
Home department: School of Accountancy  Economic and Management Sciences 
245 
 


278 (3 0) Financial Accounting (4L)  
Continuation of International Financial Reporting Standards; continuation of group statements; t reatment of 
intergroup transactions; and introduction to foreign operations.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Financial Accounting 178 or  Financial Accounting 188 or Financial Accounting  


179 
(For Financial Accounting 188 and 179 you must pass  an internal Financial Accounting test as required by the 
School.)  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



288 (32) Financial Accounting (4L)  
Continuation of International Financial Reporting Standards; introduction to group statements and treatment 
of intergroup transactions.  
Prerequisite pass module: Financial Accounting 178 or Financial Accounting 188  or Financial Accounting  179 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



379 (4 5) Financial Accounting (4.5L)  
Continuation of International Financial Reporting Standards ; continuation of group statements; complex 
groups; acquisition and sale of subsidiaries; change in degree of control; continuation of foreign operations; equity accounting of associates and joint ventures; and consolidated cash flow statements.  
Prerequisi te pass module: Financial Accounting 278 or  Financial Accounting 


389 (I n the case of Financial 
Accounting 389,  you must achieve  a final mark of 60 %.) 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



389 (48) Financial Accounting (4L)  
Advanced aspects of International Financial Reporting Standards; continuation of group statements and 
consolidated cash flow statements.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Financial Accounting 278 or  Financial Accounting 


288 ( You may not take any  third -
year Logistic Management modules in combination with Financial Accounting 389.)  
Home department: School of Accountancy  


Subject: 10812 Management Accounting  





278 (30) Management Accounting (4L)  
Concepts of strategy and business risk. Time value of money; risk and return; valuations; working capital 
management; financing decision; cost of capital and investment decision. Cost elements and concepts; cost 
assignment and behaviour; costing systems including job costing, standard costing and process costing; joint and b y-products; budgets; and absorption and variable costing.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Financial Accounting 178 or  Financial Accounting 188 or Financial Accounting  


179 
(For Financial Accounting 188 and 179 you must pass an internal Financial Accounting test as required by the 
School .) 
Corequisite module: Financial Accounting 278 or  Financial Accounting  288 
Home department: School of Accountancy  



288 (24) Management Accounting (3L)  
Introduction to strategy. Time value of money; risk and return;  valuation of preference shares and bonds; 
working capital management; financing decision and cost of capital. Fundamental  concepts of cost and 
management accounting; cost assignment and  behaviour; job costing; standard costing; process costing; 
joint and b y-products; budgeting and control. 
Prerequisite pass module: Financial Accounting 188  or Financial Accounting  179  
or  
Prerequisite module: Financial Accounting 178  
Home department: School of Accountancy  Economic and Management Sciences 
246 
 


378 (36) Management Accounting (3L)  
Valuations and takeovers; analysis of financial information in the integrated report; dividend policy; 
businesses in financial stress and financial risk. Standard costing; optimisation; performance management; 
cost- volume -profit analysis; risk and uncertainty; activity -based costing; relevant information and transfer 
pricing.  
Prerequisite pass module: Financial Accounting 278 or Management Accounting 


388 (In the case of 
Management Accounting 388, you  must achieve a final mark of 60 %.) 
Prerequisite module: Management Accounting 


278 (This prerequisite module does not apply if you passed 
Management Accounting 388.)  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



388 (48) Management Accounting (4L)  
Valuations of businesses; takeovers, analysis of financial information in the integrated report; division of profit and financial risk. Budgeting and control; standard costing; absorption and variable costing; cost -volume -
profit analysis; risk and uncertainty; activity -based costing; relevant information; throughput accounting and 
cost management techniques. 
Prerequisite pass module: Financial Accounting 278 or  Financial Accounting  288 
Prerequisite module: Management Accounting 278 or  Management Accounting 288  
Home department: School of Accountancy  


Subject: 18287 Taxation  





298 (24) Taxation (2L)  
The taxation structure of the Republic of South Africa with reference to the Income Tax Act; determining the 
normal tax liability (taking into account capital gains tax) and withholding tax liability of natural persons and the calculation of employees’ tax. 
Prerequisite pass module:  Financial Accounting 178 or  Financial Accounting 188 or Financial Accounting  


179 
(For Financial Accounting  188 and 179 you must pass an internal Financial Accounting test as required by the 
School .) 
Corequisite module: Financial Accounting 278  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



388 (24) Taxation (2L)  
The taxation structure of the Republic of South Africa with reference to the Income Tax Act; determining the 
normal tax liability of natural persons and companies (taking into account capital gains tax); tax returns, 
assessments and sundry administrative aspects regarding taxation. VAT in terms of the Value Added Tax Act.  
Prerequisite pass module: Financial Accounti ng 178 or Financial Accounting 188  or Financial Accounting 179  
Home department: School of Accountancy  



399 (36) Taxation (3L)  
Tax legislation in the Republic of South Africa, with specific reference to companies, Value Added Tax, 
capital gains tax, provisional tax and the tax of natural persons and partnerships.  
Prerequisite pass module: Financial Accounting 278  
Prerequisite module: Taxation 298  
Home department: School of Accountancy  Economic and Management Sciences 
247 
 School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14130 Applied Compliance and Control  





176 (20) Applied Compliance and Control (HL) 
Managing monitoring and evaluation prescripts; reporting; financial regulatory and value- for-money controls; 
contracting; enterprise  risk management and oversight.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14124 Applied Institutional Capacity Management  





173 (20) Applied Managing Institutional Capacity  (HL)  
The enhancement of institutional capacity through good people management and leadership skills, 
individual performance management, computer skills, research methods and written communication skills, 
goal setting and conflict management.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14127 Applied Institutional Collaboration  





175 (20) Applied Managing Institutional Collaboration (HL)  
This module focuses on the management of institutional collaboration and building alliances through nego tiation skills, conflict resolution and lobbying and building of public private partnerships.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14126 Applied Managing Institutional Performance   





172 (20) Applied  Managing Institutional Performance (HL) 
This module focuses on enhancing and leading institutional performance through sound financial 
management, programme management skills, the setting of institutional performance standards and 
strategic management and  leadership. 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14128 Applied Public Accountability  





171 (20) Applied Public Accountability (HL)  
Theories and practices of leadership and good governance and a customer - centric ethos that supports 
accountability for public service delivery. Theories and practices to engage with political -administrative 
leadership on matters of public accountability.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14129 Applied Public Financial Accounting   





177 (20) Applied Public Financial Accounting (HL)  
Applied practices of financial accounting including recording of public sector financial transactions and 
financial reporting.  
Home departme nt: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
248 
 

Subject: 13782 Building Sustainable Cities  





371 (10) Building Sustainable Cities  
The module leads students through an investigation of global sustainability challenges through the lens of 
the city, using Cape Town and Stellenbosch as case studies.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14526  Business Plans and Strategies   





121 (15) Business Plans and Strategies (HL) 
Formulate business plans for start -up enterprises; practical methods and tools needed to formulate business 
plans aimed at the market for “responsible” and “impact ” investing. This module is presented online with one 
compulsory face -to-face (F2F) teaching block. 
Home department: Schoo l of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13787 Communication, PR and Journalism Studies  





371 (10) Communication, PR & Journalism  
Students learn how to promote and manage an organisation’s public image, brand and stakeholder relationships. 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13205 Compliance and Control  





251 (20) Compliance and Control (HL) 
This module is aimed at developing conceptual insight, contextual and practical skills to implement an 
integrated risk management system, considering international best practices.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13777 Compliance and Control: Asset and Procurement Management  





122 (15) Compliance and Control : Asset and Procurement Management (HL) 
This module introduces students to the basic principles and techniques for compliance and control in public sector organisations, relating to the legal framework for asset – and supply chain management.    
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13776 Compliance and Control: Budgeting  





121 (15) Compliance and Control: Budgeting (HL) 
This module introduces students to the basic principles and techniques for compliance and control in public 
sector organisations, including budgeting and financial reporting.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14513 Ecoliteracy   





177 (20) Ecoliteracy  
The module explores the complex interplay between elements of socio -ecological systems. Students are 
introduced to ecological intelligence, environmental ethics and ecoliteracy. Students will learn how to 
describe  complex systems and interpret the interconnections between natural and human -made worlds. 
Home department:  School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
249 
 

Subject: 14528 Entrepreneurship Incubator  





151 (60) Entrepreneurship Incubator ( HL) 
This modu le prepares students to formulate a business plan for an enterprise that is regarded as a 
worthwhile investment by a “responsible/impact” investor. Four types of enterprises are included, namely 
conventional for -profit entrepreneurship, social entrepreneurship, social campaign s underpinned by social 
enterprises and “knowledge commons ” enterprises. This module is presented online with two compulsory 
face -to-face  (F2F) teaching blocks.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14519 Green Economy   





278 (15)  Green Economy  
This module provides a broad overview of the green economy and its related concepts. It highlights the 
need for a green economy against the backdrop of sustainable development and climate change. A range of green activities and green jobs, from micro to macro scale will be explored to build a comprehensive case 
for a green economy in the South African context.  
Home department:  School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13209 Institutional Conduct  





142 (15) Institutional Conduct I (HL)  
This module introduces students to legislation, regulations and codes relating to governance ethics in the 
municipal sphere  by applying principles that underpin professional code of ethic s for government officials.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



241 (20) Institutional Conduct II (HL) 
This module introduces students to the principles of critical thinking to solve problems and applies these principles to a customer -centric organisation. This module specifically outlines application of the Batho Pele 
principles, as well as organisational integrity and the value of professional ethical standards in the work 
environment.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14521  Internship   





379 (40) Internship  
This module prepares students for the move from student to working professional. Students must complete 
a 200 -hour internship at an organization/company whose work is aligned with sustainable development  
goals. The module allows students to develop general professional skills and take responsibility for their own 
development . Students are supported in identifying suitable internships and completing the application and 
interview processes. The internship allows students to learn in a relevant environment, add experience to 
their CVs, build valuable networks and refine their career aspirations.  
Home department:  School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13206 Managing Institutional Capacity  





171 (20) Managing Institutional Capacity I (HL) 
This module introduces students to the basic principles regarding the use of cost management for the 
purpose of management reporting, and the principles of information systems within a public finance and 
administration context.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
250 
 


271 (20) Managing Institutional Capacity II (HL) 
The aim of this module is to equip students with the knowledge, skills and capability to apply the principles 
and techniques o f costing; cash management and capital planning; and to make financing and investment 
decisions in a public sector context.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13207 Managing Institutional Collaboration  





182 (15) Managing Institutional Collaboration I (HL)  
This module introduces students to the legislation and practices of public collaboration between various levels of government and other stakeholders for improved service delivery and creation of public value.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



281 (20) Managing Institutional Collaboration II (HL)  
This module introduces students to alternative service delivery mechanisms. The focus is specifically on  
Public - Private Co -operation, and Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). The module therefore provides 
students with a conceptual and practical insight on how to design and implement PPP’s for improved service 
delivery.  
Home department: School of Public Le adership  


Subject: 13208 Managing Institutional Performance  





191 (20) Managing Institutional Performance I (HL)  
This module introduces students to the basic techniques and principles for improving institutional 
performance t hrough strategic planning, performance management, project management and cash 
management.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



291 (20) Managing Institutional Performance II (HL)  
The module aims to equip students with the knowledge, insight, skil ls and attitudes to enable them to 
contribute to the design of fit for purpose and effective organizational performance management systems 
and organizational structures.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13780 Mentorship and Facilitation  





371 (10) Mentorship and Facilitation  
Students experiment with the possibilities inherent in facilitating and participating in conversations that 
matter to them, as both mentors and mentees.   
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14123 Personal Conduct and Integrity 





174 (20) Applied Personal Conduct and Integrity (HL) 
This module focuses on the ability to shape the personal conduct of public officials through an understanding  and application of the codes of good practice related to customer service, ethics and integrity 
in the workplace, the Batho Pele principles and general professionalism.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
251 
 

Subject: 13210 Public Accountability  





161 (20) Public Accountability I (HL) 
This module introduces students to the fundamental constructs of public service delivery and accountability 
for service delivery within the context of a developing society.  
Home departme nt: School of Public Leadership  



261 (20) Public Accountability II (HL) 
The aim of this module is to convey understanding to students around the major changes in the world in recent decades as a result of globalisation and the implications of these changes with respect to good 
governance and the creation of a capable well performing state.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 48003 Public and Development Management 





114 (12) Orientation to Development, Society  and State (3L)  
Introduction to development, society and state as foci of development management. Themes include: contextualising development (evolution of development thinking, interdisciplinary nature, theories); 
institutional role players; development management and practices. 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



144 (12) Public Management and Policy (3L)  
This module will equip students with the knowledge and expertise required to deal with managerial tasks of 
the public manager with in the public policy management and development environment. The module 
covers the nature of public policy, governance, development, sustainability and good policy practices 
(environmental, social, economic and political development).  
Home department: Scho ol of Public Leadership 



212 (8) Development Theory and Paradigms (1.5L)  
Critical assessment of development theories and paradigms, including modernisation, modernity, dependency, post- development, post -modernism, sustainable development, feminism and criti cal 
modernism. 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



222 (8) Governance (1.5L)  
This module will focus on the contemporary governance arrangements and the role and macro- organisation 
of the State. This includes theories of the State, the moral and ethical bases of the State and multi -level 
governance at and between levels of the State.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



242 (8) Development Frameworks (1.5L)  
As developing countries struggle to keep pace with the progress of technology and globalisation, they 
encounter many new challenges. These include increasing complexity and uncertainty; more individualisation and social diversity; expanding economic and cultural uniformity; degradation of ecosystem 
services, upon which economic and socia l development depends; and a greater vulnerability and exposure 
to technological and natural hazards. In light of this, sustainability -and-sustainable -development thinking 
provides students with the necessary conceptual understanding, values and skills req uired to adapt to these 
wicked problems.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



252 (8) The Public Policy Process (1.5L)  
Studies public policy and developmental policy by analysing the process through which public policy is 
formulated, policy agenda  setting, policy option generation, policy implementation, policy evaluation, policy 
impact assessment and policy change.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
252 
 


314 (12) Development Management (1.5L)  
Critical interrogation of contemporary development; introduction to development management; appraisal of 
the foundations and components of development management (community development, participation, 
empowerment and citizenship); alternatives to development proposed by social movements; reconsidering 
development and development management.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Public and Development Management 114  
• Public and Development Management 144 
• Public and Development Management 212 
• Public and Development Management 222 
• Public and Development Management 242 
• Public and Development Management 252 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



324 (12) Public Management Strategies (1.5L) 
This module explores the strategic nature and integrity of whatever is planned, executed and evaluated to achieve good governance, through a focus on:  
• Strategic function:  definition, planning, execution and evaluation of the purpose of an initiative by 
means of strategic planning as well as programme and project management techniques . 
• Resources:  strategies for utilisation of financial, human and information resources in serving the 
purpose; and  
• Structure:  The utilisation of organisational development (OD) techniques to acquire the appropriate 
organisational framework by which the purpose is served.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Public and Development Management 114  
• Public and Development Management 144  
• Public and Development Management 212  
• Public and Development Management 222  
• Public and Development Management 242  
• Public and Development Management 252  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



348 (24) Integrated Development, Policy and Management Theory and Practice 
Capstone (1.5L)  
The study of topical issues in public and development management and integrated governance like, for example, issues concerning ethics, housing, public and private partnerships, alternat ive service delivery, 
organisational change, performance management and transformation and regulatory and environmental governance (capita selecta).  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Public and Development Management 114  
• Public and Development Management 144  
• Public and Development Management 212  
• Public and Development Management 222  
• Public and Development Management 242  
• Public and Development Management 252  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13211 Public Financial Accounting   





231 (20) Public Financial Accounting (HL) 
This module introduces students to the fundamental constructs of public financial accounting and auditing, 
including the conceptual framework of Accounting; Generally Recognized Accounting Practices (GRAP) ; the 
accounting process; the preparation of public financial reports and audit planning and implementation.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
253 
 

Subject: 14515  Regenerative Leadership   





177 (10)  Regenerative Leadership  
This module focuses on Personal Leadership Development. The module is guided by the question, “What 
have I learnt about myself, and what do I do with this information?” The content centres on the emotional 
intelligence principles o f self -awareness and self -management. Students will have opportunities to critically 
examine their own individual behaviour as it relates to both their academic and non -academic environments.  
Students will become competent in professional communication th rough exploring verbal, non -verbal and 
written communication skills. 
Students will improve their academic language proficiency by completing an online reading programme. 
Students will particip ate in a peer -to-peer mentorship programme to help them navigate the academic 
environment.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



278 (15) Regenerative Leadership  
This module focuses on f acilitation skills and l eadership. The module is guided by the questions, “What am I 
seeing in other people?” and “What do I d o with these observations?” The module content centres on the 
emotional intelligence principles of social awareness and relationship management.  
Students will apply the theory of facilitation and develop their facilitation skills through the practical facilitation of group processes. Students will critically reflect on their own emotional intelligence and their 
skills as facilitators.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



379 (10) Regenerative Leadership  
This module focuses on Mentorship and Leadership. The module is guided by the questions “What do people/communities want and need?” and, as such, “How can I help them achieve this?” The content centres 
on the emotional intelligence principles of self -performance, people performance and motivation.  
Students will explore the concept of leadership and consolidate various leadership theories to ultimately 
identify their own personal leadership style that considers their values and personality traits.  
In this module, students will have the opportunity to mentor first and/or second year students through a 
peer- to-peer mentorship programme.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Regenerative Leadership 177  
• Regenerative Leadership 278 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14527  Research Approaches  





131 (15) Research Approaches (HL) 
This module prepares students to undertake rigorous and credible research. It provides students with a 
practical understanding of academic tools and encompasses literature reviews, research approaches and 
data capturing. This module is presented online wit h one compulsory face -to-face  (F2F) teaching block  
Home department:  School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14518 Social Change   





278 (15) Social Change  
This module focuses on collective behaviour, group dynamics, social movements, revolutions,  and other 
types of social change that shape the developmental agenda of the future. Students will investigate the 
changing role of state, civil society and business and how informality, incrementalism and social 
entrepreneurship contribute to social chang e, using  case studies like Black  Lives Matter and #FeesMustFall. 
Throughout, students will develop their abilities to facilitate positive social change.  
Home departme nt: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
254 
 

Subject: 13786 Social Entrepreneurship   





177 (20) Social Entrepreneurship  
Students will be introduced to Social Entrepreneurship as both a practice and a process. As a practice, Social 
Entrepreneurship involves thought leadership that is focused on transformational change. Core concepts a nd 
principles that underpin the ethics of Social Entrepreneurship are introduced to help students build their self -
understanding of passion and purpose towards change -agency in business and society.  
Social Entrepreneurship is also a solution -orientated pr ocess. Students will develop a set of skills and 
competencies that are informed by the entrepreneurial mindset, specifically self -efficacy and the creative 
competencies that form the basis for ideation.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



278 (40) Social Entrepreneurship  
In this module, students will be introduced to social entrepreneurship business tools such as the Lean 
Canvas business model and basic financial management. Building on the practice, purpose and process of the entrepreneurial mind set, students will explore group ideation processes that promote experimentation, 
iteration, and adaptation.  
Prerequisite pass module: Social Entrepreneurship 177  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



371 (10) Social Entrepreneurship 2  
This module develops critical skills for social enterprises, including impact measurement, governance and 
strategy frameworks.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



379 (40) Social Entrepreneurship  
In this module, students will be introduced to funding strategies and governance models for social enterprise and sustainable business. Building on the practice, purpose and process on the entrepreneurial mindset students will explore intrapreneurial think ing and professional development as a social entrepreneur.  
Prerequisite pass modules: 
• Social Entrepreneurship 177  
• Social Entrepreneurship 278 
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13785 Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship  





371 (30) Social Innovation & Entrepreneurship 2  
A year -long experiential journey in which students develop a set of skills and competencies that are required 
to conceive, start up and manage social enterprises.   
Home department: Sc hool of Public Leadership 


Subject: 60771 Strategic Communication   





177 (20) Strategic Communication  
This module introduces students to different ways of communicating (written, oral, visual expression). It introduces communication theories, builds critical reading and writing skills, improves presentation ability 
and encourages reflective thinking.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  



278 (15) Strategic Communication  
This module puts into action knowledge concerning  commun ication skills, framing messages, knowledge 
concerning  target markets, and developing communication outputs. Students develop a communication 
strategy focused on a sustainability challenge and produce communication outputs related to the strategy.  
Prerequisite pass module:  Strategic Communication 177  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
255 
 


379 (15) Strategic Communication  
This module prepares students for working life by undertaking a real -life communications project for a social 
enterprise. Students deepen their critical and creative thinking abilities to develop a communications output 
(includes a publication component, basic website and video) to a client brief. Students conceptualise a 
communication strategy and incorporate client feedback in the corresponding communication output.  
Prerequisite pass modules:  
• Strategic Communication 177  
• Strategic Communication 278  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14525 Sustainability in the Digital Age   





111 (30) Sustainability in the Digital Age (HL) 
This module introduces students to the role information and communication technologies can play to either achieve or subvert the global commitment to sustainable development. Within this context, the emergen ce 
and consolidation of principles and codes for responsible investing and impact investing are explored. The practical component of this module focuses on strategies and techniques deployed by “ tech -entrepreneurs” . 
This module is presented online with two  compulsory face -to-face  (F2F) teaching blocks.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14514 Sustainability Perspectives 





177 (15) Sustainability Perspectives  
This module introduces sustainable development by ex ploring the narratives and paradigms that have 
shaped the concept of sustainability. Students will be able to describe various interpretations of sustainable development, with a focus on Afrocentric perspectives.  
Environmental, social and economic nexus points will be used to explore the interconnectedness of local and global crises. This allows students to develop a comprehensive understanding of sustainability that can 
inform individual action for change.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14520 Sustainability Reporting   





379 (15) Sustainability Reporting  
Sustainability reporting facilitates the social and environmental impact of organisations. In this module, 
sustainability reporting is presented as a tool for risk identification, increasing transparency and accountability where traditional financial reporting is insufficient. Theory of Change is introduced as a 
process for planning, participation, and evaluation to promote social change within organisations.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13763 Sustainable Design   





177 (20) Sustainable Design  
This module explores various aspects of design, and the impact design has on socio- ecological systems. 
Students will be introduced to different design disciplines relating to sustainable design. Permaculture 
design, biomimicry and design thinking methodolo gies will be used to generate ideas for sustainable 
solutions.   
Home department: School of Public Leadership  Economic and Management Sciences 
256 
 


278 (20) Sustainable Design  
This module investigates complex networks within urban systems. Students will use a design thinking 
approach to investigate urban sustainability challenges in their context before prototyping and testing simple 
solutions.  
An urban sustainability approach is used to investigate strategies for building sustainable cities. Innovations 
in waste, energy, transport and water systems will be reviewed.   
Prerequisite pass module: Sustainable Design 177  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13783 Sustainable Development Internship  





371 (40) Sustainable Development Internship  
The internship programme involves at least 200 contact hours at an organisation/company that works 
towards a Sustainable Development Goal.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 13784 Sustainable Reporting, Monitoring and Evaluation 





371 (10) Sustainability Reporting, Monitoring & Evaluation  
This module provides a broad set of monitoring, evaluation and reporting skills to meet the growing demand 
for such skills in the South African non -profit, privat e and public sectors. 
Home department:  School of Public Leadership  


Subject: 14517 Worldviews  





177 (15) Worldviews  
This module introduces different worldviews, belief systems and ethics as " ways of knowing " and then 
explores how these " ways of knowing " affect different understandings of, and practices in, global 
development. This includes topics like environmental ethi cs, decoloni sation and feminism. This allows 
students to explore similarities and differences in how people make meaning, assign value and arrange themselves in social and political units. These explorations provide perspective and global self -awareness 
that will allow students to navigate developmental agendas meaningfully across differences in a South 
African and global context.  
Home department: School of Public Leadership  
SU Language Centre   


Subject: 14220 Professional Communicatio n for EMS  





144 (6) Professional Communication for EMS (2L) 
This module will focus on effective professional communication for business. The overarching themes 
informing the development of faculty and industry relev ant skills incorporate ethical communication, 
collaborative writing and a foundational argumentative methodology. Academic and professional writing 
skills will be developed by focusing on industry -specific documents such as reports, correspondence and 
presentations. Appropriate tone, style and authoritative referencing will underpin the documents produced.  
Home department: Language Centre  Economic and Management Sciences 
257 
 Faculty of Economic and Management Sciences   


Subject: 11569 Academic Lit eracy for Economic and Management Sciences  





111 (12) Academic Literacy for Economic and Management Sciences (4L, 2T)  
The focus of this module is to promote academic literacy for economics with an economic thought approach 
(to think like economists). Students are provided with the opportunity:   
• to use economics to solve meaningful problems and understand the art of the logic of economics;   
• to practise the skills and analysis that are fundamental to participating in economics debate and 
decision -making;  
• to apply basic critical thinking skills through critical listening, reading and writing of economics texts (i.e. deductive reasoning, analyse economic policies, construct arguments and support them, 
interpret different kinds of economic text (i.e. Adam Smith; Popper, Malthus)); understand academic vocabulary, interpret the use of analogies and metaphors in the context of social coordination, 
individualism, self -interest; understand the market as a system; understand voluntary exchange, 
profit, process and incentives, to read and interpret information presented in graphic or visual format 
(demand and supply curves);   
• to explain their thinking and constructively critique the thinking of others;   
• to focus on organising information logically; select important information and reduce it to a form that is easy to study and review.  
Students will further acquire the basic knowledge, skills and attitudes to become successful EMS students by under standing the university ethos, by developing academic readiness and personal management skills 
such as study, time and stress management.  
Home  Faculty: Faculty of Economic and Management Sciences  


Subject: 12298 Introduction to Economics  





141 (12) Introduction to Economics (4L, 2T)  
The focus of this module is to provide a comprehensive introduction to microeconomics in general, set 
against a contemporary South African background. Students will learn how to  apply microeconomic 
principles to a wide variety of real -world situations in both their personal and professional life. Deeper 
understanding and working knowledge of the following basic fundamental microeconomic concepts will be provided: what economics i s about; the three central economic questions; how different economies answer 
these questions; how the economy functions as a whole; what drives the economy.  
Home  Faculty : Faculty of Economic and Management Sciences  


Subject: 11580 Mathematics for EMS 





171 (18) Mathematics for EMS (3L, 2T) 
The focus of this module is to provide a foundation and promote deeper understanding and working 
knowledge of the following basic fundamental Mathematics concepts:  pre-calculus review; straight lines, 
linear functions and linear programming with an emphasis on shadow prices and sensitivity analysis; financial 
mathematics that extensively covers simple interest, compound interest involving time- lines, interest -
discount rate conversions and annuities; sets and counting techniques; probability; functions, limits and the derivative; differentiation; applications of the derivative with an emphasis on the optimisation of cost, revenue and profit functions; antiderivatives (integrals) of power functions only in relation to areas under curves.  
Home  Faculty : Faculty of Economic and Management Sciences  
  