 
   
94 SC.5.1.3          ACTUARIAL SCIENCE    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module    ACS03A3  Actuarial Science 3A  
NQF Level              7 
Credits              30 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Prerequisite  ACS02A2, ACS02B2, STA02A2, STA02B2  
Purpose  The aim of this course is to provide a grounding in mathematical 
and statistical modelling techniques that are of particular 
relevance to actuarial work, including stochastic processes and 
survival models and their applications.  
Module learning outcomes:   On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and use statistical distributions for risk modelling. This includes use of compound 
distributions, expressing association between variables explicitly using copulas and extreme 
value distributions to model the distribution of severity of loss  
• Describe and apply the main concepts underlying the analysis of time series models. 
Applications include random walk, autoregressive and cointegrated models as applied to 
security prices and other economic variables.  
• Describe and apply Markov chains and processes. Using this knowledge, the student will 
analyse the random process by which a life passes from one state (alive) to another (dead).   
• Describe and apply techniques of survival analysis. This includes deriving many results that are 
the building blocks of actuarial work relating to human mortality, describing methods of 
graduating mortality data and describing approaches to forecasting of future mortality rates  
• Describe and apply basic principles of machine learning . 
 
 
SC.5.1.4            ACTUARIAL SCIENCE    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module    ACS03B3  Actuarial Science 3B  
NQF Level               7 
Credits              30 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisite  ACS03A3 and ACS02A2, ACS02B2, STA02A2, STA02B2  
Purpose  The aim of this subject is to provide a grounding in the principles 
of modelling as applied to actuarial work – focusing particularly on 
deterministic models which can be used to model and value 
cashflows that are dependent on death, survival, or other 
uncertain risks . 
Module learning outcomes:   On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe, interpret  and discuss mathematical techniques used to model and value cashflows 
which are contingent on mortality and morbidity risks  
• Define various assurance and annuity contracts  
• Develop formulae for the means and variances of the payments under various assurance and 
annuity contracts  
• Define and use assurance and annuity contracts involving two lives  
• Describe and illustrate methods of valuing cash flows that are contingent upon multiple transition 
events  
• Describe and use methods of projecting and valuing expected cash flows that are contingent 
upon multiple decrement events  
• Define the gross future loss under an insurance contract, and state the principle of equivalence  
• Describe and calculate gross premiums and reserves of assurance and annuity contracts  
• Define and calculate, for a single policy or a portfolio of policies, the death strain at risk, expected 
death strain, actual death strain and mortality profit  
• Project expected cash flows for whole life, endowment and term assurances, annuities, unit -
linked contracts and conventional/unitised with profits contracts, incorporating multiple 
decrement models where appropriate.  
• Show how, for unit -linked contracts, non -unit reserves can be set up to ‘zeroise’ future negative 
cash flows, using a profit test model . 
  
   
95 SC.5. 2 ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES                                    ATE 
 
 
SC.5. 2.1 ANALYTICAL  TECHNIQUES   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module    ATE01A1   Descriptive Statistics  
NQF Level         5 
Credits    15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Purpose  A student credited with this module will have developed a basic 
ability to define terms commonly used in Statistics, to show how 
a set of data can be organised in a meaningful way and presented 
so as to re veal or enhance its fundamental p roperties. The student 
will also be able to measure and model the linear relationship 
between two variables. A student credited with this module will 
have developed a basic ab ility to analyse a time series, 
understand and implement the basic concepts of probability, 
probabi lity distributions, sampling distributions and elementary 
matrix operations.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate the ability to use statistical terminology in the appropriate way and distinguish 
between different measurement scales.  
• Show how the raw data can be tabulated and presented graphically.  
• Calculate and interpret measures of central tendency and spread for a set of data and perform 
elementary probability calculations  
• Identify different methods used to gather sample data and understand the basic concepts of 
sampling distributions and statistical inference.  
• Show how to analyse a time series and forecast values for future time periods.  
• Determine and use least squares regression lines and the coefficients of correlation.  
 
 
SC.5. 2.2 ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   ATE01B1   Statistical Inference  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Descriptive Statistics ( ATE01A1 ) 
Purpose   To develop a basic understanding of inferential statistics and the 
ability to apply the methodol ogy to a variety of business -oriented 
problems. This module is also intended to equip students with 
mathematical skills involving the differential and integral calculus 
and the optimisation of functions subject to constraints and to apply 
these to understand modern theories about the functioning of the 
economy.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply various inferential methods to data . 
• Apply the rudiments of the differential and integral calculus to business applications . 
• Find the maximum or minimum of a multivariable function subject to linear constraints on the 
variables.  
 
SC.5.2.3  ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   ATEACP2   Analytical Techniques 1A (online module)  
Qualification   Online Bachelor of Human Resource Management (B34HRP)  
NQF Level         5 
Credits    15 
Presentation   Online Semester module  
Assessment   Continuous Evaluation   
   
96 Purpose  A student credited with this module will have developed a basic 
ability to define terms commonly used in Statistics, to show how 
a set of data can be organised in a meaningful way and presented 
so as to reveal or enhance its fundamental properties. The stu dent 
will also be able to measure and model the linear relationship 
between two variables. A student credited with this module will 
have developed a basic ability to analyse a time series, 
understand and implement the basic concepts of probability, 
probabi lity distributions, sampling distributions and elementary 
matrix operations.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate the ability to use statistical terminology in the appropriate way and distinguish 
between different measurement scales.  
• Show how the raw data can be tabulated and presented graphically.  
• Calculate and interpret measures of central tendency and spread for a set of data and perform 
elementary probability calculations.  
• Identify different methods used to gather sample data and understand the basic concepts of 
sampling distributions and statistical inference.  
• Show how to analyse a time series and forecast values for future time periods.  
• Determine and use least squares regression lines and the coefficients of correlation.  
 
 
 
 
SC.5. 3  APPLIED MATHEMATICS                                                           APM  
 
 
APPLIED MATHEMATICS ALTERNATIVE SEMESTER MODULES - An alternative 
presentation of first year Applied Mathematics  
 
Alternative Semester Courses are presented by the Department of Mathematics and Applied 
Mathematics, eg. APM 01A1 is offered in the first semester, while the alternative ASMA1A1  is 
offered in the subsequent (second) semester. This presentation is intended to provide students 
who had failed the original course, with the opportunity to repeat the same module in the 
following/alternative semester. Students do not have to wait a whol e semester before repeating the 
module. This opportunity is available for the fo llowing modules:  
 
APM01A1, APM01B1 (as A PMA1A1, A PMA1B1 respectively)   
APM02A2, APM02B2 (as APMA2A2 and APMA2B2  respectively)  
 
Entrance Requirements:   Please refer to Part 1  
Pass requirements:  At least 50%  
 
For further information contact the Department of Mathematics  and Applied Mathematics:  
Tel: (011) 559 -2831/2661 (office hours)  
Fax: (011) 559 -2874  
 
 
ASSESSMENT AND WEIGHTING  
 
ASSESSMENT  
Attendance of both semester tests is compulsory. Exemptions will only be granted in cases where 
a student submits  a medical certificate (from a registered medical practitioner) certifying that the 
student was not able to take the test or in cases where a student experiences an urgent personal 
crisis (such as a death in the immediate family). If an exemption is grante d, the lecturer will make 
arrangements for a supplementary assessment.  
 
Note that the regulations of the UJ require a medical certificate to be handed in within 7 calendar 
days of the scheduled test.  
  
   
97 At the end of each semester a semester mark (SM) is calculated for each student. This mark is 
derived from the student’s marks in the two semester tests as well as tutorial assignments. If  a 
student is admitted to the examination, he/she will earn an examination mark (EM). The SM and 
EM will then be combined to yield a final mark (FM).  
 
 
SC.5. 3.1 APPLIED M ATHEMATICS   LEVEL 5 
 
Module   APM1EB1  Applied Mathematics 1A1E  
Geometry and Vector Algebra  
NQF Level              5 
Credits    12 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisite  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of mathematical 
modelling. The purpose of this module is to reinforce concepts from 
Geometry and Analytical Geometry and introduce the concepts and 
techniques of Vector Algebra.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand the postulates of Euclidean Geometry and how these postulates are applied to 
solve problems;  
• Understand the various methods of proof used to solve geometric problems;  
• Be able to solve geometric problems using Geometry and Analytical Geometry;  
• Know and define what a scalar and a vector is;  
• Be able to calculate the direction and magnitude of a vector using Analytical Geometry 
techniques;  
• Know which algebraic operations are applicable to vectors and the properties of these vector 
algebraic operations;  
• Define the scalar product and its properties and use it to solve abstract problems;  
• Define the vector product and its properties and use it to solve abstract problems;  
• Define the triple products and their properties and use them to solve abstract problems.  
 
 
SC.5. 3.2 APPLIED MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 
 
Module  APM2EA1  Applied Mathematics 1A2E  
Introduction to Mathematical Modelling  
NQF Level              5 
Credits    12 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Prerequisites  APM1EB1  and MAT1EA1  
Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of mathematical 
modelling. The purpose of this module is to master the concepts and 
techniques of Vector Algebra and apply these concepts and 
techniques to real world problems .   
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify the parameters and variables relevant to a real -world problem;  
• Construct a mathematical model of the real -world problem using vector algebra;  
• Utilize the appropriate vector algebraic operations to solve the mathematical model;  
• Interpret the solution and its relation to the real -world problem.  
 
 
SC.5.3 .3 APPLIED MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 5  (First Year)  
 
Module  APM01A1  Introduction  to Mathematical Modelling  1A 
NQF Level              5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 1 
Prerequisite  Grade 12 Mathematics – APS 6  (BSc)  
Grade 12 Mathematics – APS 5 (Engineering)   
   
98 Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of mathematical 
modelling. This course introduces the student to the methodology of 
this approach, where a mathematical model is derived for a real -life 
system, the solution(s) to the mathematical problem is found and the 
results are interpreted in order to solve the real -life probl em. 
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify the variables and parameters relevant to a real -life problem.  
• Construct a mathematical model which relates these variables.  
• Utilize the appropriate mathematical techniques in order to solve the resulting model.  
• Interpret the results and relate these to the real -life problem.  
 
 
SC.5. 3.4 APPLIED MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module APM01B1   Introduction to Analytical Dynamics  1B 
NQF Level       5 
Credits    15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   APM 01A1 or APMA1A1 and MAT01A1  or MAT3EA1  or MATENA1 
or ASMA1A1  
Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of  mathematical 
modelling.  In this course, the motion of bodies are rigorously studied 
using analytical methods.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify all dynamical variables in a given mechanical system.  
• Formulate the  equations of motion in a given mechanical system . 
• Solve these equations by analytical means.  
 
 
SC.5. 3.5 APPLIED MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 6  (Second  Year)  
 
Module APM02A2   Introduction to Differential Equations  
NQF Level               6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester  1 
Prerequisites  APM01B1  or APMA1B1  and MAT01A1  or MAT3EA1  or ASMA1A1  
or MATENA1  and MAT01B1  or ASMA1B1  or MATENB1  
Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of mathematical 
modelling. Continuous phenomena are often modelled via 
differential equations. The purpose of this module is to teach 
analytical and formal methods of solution for a variety of differential 
equations, predominantly linear.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand and apply basic concepts concerning ODEs.  
• Solve first -order Differential Equations (ODEs) and systems of ODEs at an appropriate level.  
• Use transformation of variables.  
• Study systems of differential equations using qualitative techniques.  
• Understand and apply the basic concepts of mathematical modelling, using differential 
equations, to a wide variety of fields at an appropriate level.  
• Master the philosophy and language of the field.  
 
 
SC.5.3.6 APPLIED MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 6 (Second  Year)  
 
Module APM02B2   Introduction to Numerical Analysis  
NQF Level                6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  APM01B1  or APMA1B1  and MAT01A1  or MAT3EA1  or ASMA1A1  
or MATENA1  and MAT01B1  or ASMA1B1  or MATENB1   
   
99 Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of mathematical 
modelling. Often these models can only be solved by numerical 
(rather than analytical) methods. The purpose of this module is to 
introduce various concepts in the vast field of Numerical Analysis: 
methods of solution of linear and non -linear equations,  
approximation theory, numerical differentiation and integration and 
techniques for solving ordinary differential equations (ODEs).  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Appreciate the mathematical origin of the method of Numerical Analysis.  
• Apply these methods in order to find numerical solutions for various mathematically  formulated 
problems.  
• Understand that these methods are approximations and that errors are associated with solutions 
found by using these methods.  
• Understand the derivation of error formulas to use these formulas to find solutions of required 
accuracy.  
 
 
SC.5. 3.7 APPLIED MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third  Year)  
 
Module   APM03A3   Mathematical Optimisation  
NQF Level               7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  APM01A1, APM01B1 , APM02A2 , APM02B2  and MAT01A1, 
MAT01B1, MAT01 A2, MAT02A2 , MAT01B2  and M AT02B2  (or 
equivalent alternative semester module offerings) . 
Purpose   The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of m athematical 
modelling. The purpose of this module is to introduce students to the 
theory and applications of Mathematical Optimisation and the 
methodology to solve mathematical models which require optimal 
solutions . 
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Classify and model various optimisation problems based on real -world examples, by identifying 
objective functions, decision variables and constraints, and represent these concepts with the 
correct mathematical language.  
• Understand the derivation of the optimality conditions.  
• Differentiate between first - and second -order necessary and sufficient optimality conditions.  
• Apply the optimality conditions to solve optimisation problems.  
• Solve unconstrained optimisation problems using suitable mathematical methods.  
• Solve constrained optimisation problems using the Lagrange multiplier method and Karush -
Kuhn-Tucker conditions.  
• Solve nonlinear optimisation problems using suitable numerical method . 
 
 
SC.5. 3.8 APPLIED MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third  Year)  
 
Module   APM03B3   Multi -linear Algebra  
NQF Level                7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester  2 
Prerequisites  APM01B1 /APMA1B1  or APM2EA1  and APM02A2 /APMA2A2 , 
APM02B2 /APMA2B2  and MAT01A2 /ASMA2A1  and 
MAT02A2 /ASMA2A2  and MAT01B 1/ASMA2B1  and MAT02B2 / 
ASMA2B2  
Purpose  The central theme in Applied Mathematics is that of mathematical 
modelling. The purpose of this module is to give a comprehensive 
introduction to multi -linear algebra. This will enable the student to 
study mathematical models relevant to problems in physics and 
engineering.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:   
   
100 • Understand the concept of multi -linear algebra and product spaces.  
• Use multi -linear algebra and the Kronecker product in physics and quantum groups.  
• Apply software packages to problems in science.  
 
 
SC.5. 4  BIOCHEMISTRY             BIC 
 
The following Chemistry modules:  Introduction of General Chemistry ( CEM01A1 ), Introduction of 
Physical and Organic Chemistry ( CEM01B1 ) are compulsory modules for Biochemistry as a major and 
are prerequisites for Biochemistry 2 and 3. CEM1AC1  or CEM2EC1  and CEM3EC1  include aspects of 
general chemistry relevant to the biological sciences and can be taken as an equivalent to CEM01A1 .   
 
A student may register for CEM01B1  if a pass of at least 60% is achieved in  CEM1AC1 . 
A student may register for CEM01B1  if a pass of at least 65% is achieved in CEM2EC1  and CEM3EC1 . 
 
• The combination of CEM1AC1  (>60%) and CEM01B1  gives access to Biochemistry 2  
• The combination of CEM2EC1  and CEM3EC1  (>65%) and CEM01B1  gives access to Biochemistry 2  
• The combination of CEM1AC1  and CEM1DB1  does not  allow access to Biochemistry 2  
• Mathematics 1C (Bio and Enviro Math & Stats) OR Mathematics 1A are prerequisites for 
Biochemistry 2A  
 
Practicals  
BIC01B1 = 1 x 3 hour per week  
BIC02A2  = 1 x 6 hour per week  
BIC02B2  = 1 x 6 hour per week  
BIC03A3  = 1 x 6 hour per week  
BIC03B3  = 1 x 6 hour per week  
 
Practicals  form an integral part of the theory discussed during lectures. A sub-minimum  of 50% for 
practicals is required for admission to semester examinations in B iochemistry. A student repeating a 
module will only be given practical exemption for that module if a minimum of 50% for the practical work 
was obtained in the previous year.   
 
The Biochemistry department has formal minimum requirements that have to be met to allow entry t o 
final summative assessments.  Unsatisfactory attendance of lectures or (where applicable) participation 
in an electronic learning environment and practicals is taken into consideration when unsatisfactory 
progress in a student’s studies is determined.  
 
Practicals  
• All practicals have to be attended and practical assignments/reports have to be submitted on or 
before the indicated dates. Practical classes form an integral part of the module and NO student will 
be excused from practical classes.  
• Practical classes are compulsory and count towards the semester mark.   If an assessment 
opportunity of whatever kind is missed due to illness or death of immediate family, an original 
medical certificate with a valid medical condition  or other applicable certificate plus the Application 
for Deferred test/final assessment (in the Appendix section of this guide) MUST be completed by a 
reputable general practitioner or a death certificate must be handed in not later than 3 days  after the 
missed practical or te st.  Failure to do so will result in a mark of zero being allocated.  The absence 
from any practical without reason will result in a semester mark of "incomplete". A maximum of 1 
practical session may be missed with valid reasons. If more than 1 practical session  is missed, even 
with valid reasons, the student will be given an “incomplete” mark which will result in no exam 
entrance.  
• Absence from a practical session must be motivated by a doctor’s certificate with a valid medical 
condition. This only excuses the student from the practical session; a report must still be handed in 
when returning to university - before starting the next practical session. The class test (if there is 
one) for the missed practical/tutorial class must also be written.  
• In addition to weekly practical reports, a practical exam is written at the end of each module. The 
combined mark for the practical reports and the practical exam must be at least 50% to gain 
admission to the final theory assessment opportunity.  
• The practical mark contributes 50% of the module mark . The calculation of the module mark and 
the contribution of the practical component thereto, are explained in the respective study guides. If 
a student fails the final assessment exam, he/she can obtain exemption from repeating the practical 
component of a module if the combined final mark for the practical reports and practical exam was 
greater than 50% .  
   
101 Theory  
• Class attendance is very important to master the theory component of all Biochemistry modules. 
Tests and tutorials are compulsory and all formal formative assessment marks count towards the 
module mark.  
• Tests and tutorials are compulsory and count towards the module/semester mark.   If an assessment 
opportunity of whatever kind is missed due to illness or death of immediate family, an original 
medical certificate with a valid medical condition  or other applicable certificate plus the Application 
for Deferred test/final assessment (in the Appendix section of this guide) MUST be completed by a 
reputable general practitioner or a death certificate must be handed in not later than 3 days  after the 
missed test.  Failure to do so will result in a mark of zero being allocated.  
• In the determination of the module/semester mark, the mark attained in the theoretical assessment 
is given a weight of 50% and the practical mark a weight ing of 50%. The calculation of the module 
mark and the contribution/ weighting of the theory and practical components thereto, are explained 
in the respective study guides.  
 
 
SC.5. 4.1 BIOCHEMISTRY LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   BIC01B1  Principles of Biochemistry  
NQF Level   5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Biology (BIO10A1  or BIO2EA1 ) 
Purpose  This module  - Principles of Biochemistry  - forms an integral part of the 
BSc Life and Environmental Sciences and BSc Physical Sciences 
qualification and lays the foundation for Biochemistry as the language 
and central core of the Life Sciences.  It provides students with a 
fundamental, general knowledge of basic principles and techniques in 
Biochemistry that would equip them for further undergraduate studies in 
Biochemistry in following years.  It also serves as a service module for 
students who do not wish to major in Biochemistry, but who require an 
introductory module as part of study in the Life Scien ces. 
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Recognize, determine and demonstrate the working and calculation of buffers.  
• Define, memorize, explain  and show the working of proteins.  
• Indicate, classify and recognize different biomolecules and understand their actions in 
membrane function.  
• Describe basic molecular techniques, employ and solve biotechnological problems and their 
use in new developments.  
 
 
SC.5. 4.2 BIOCHEMISTRY LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  BIC02A2   Biochemical Techniques and Enzymology  
NQF Level    6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites  BIO10A1 or BIO2EA1 and BIC01B1, CEM01A1 or CEM3EA1 or CEM1AC1 
(60%) or CEM2EC1 and CEM3EC1 (Ave 65%) and CEM01B1 and 
MAT01A1 or MAT2EB1 and MAT3EA1 or MAT1CA1 or MAT2EC1 and 
MAT3EC1 or ASMA1A1   
   
102 Purpose  The primary purpose of this course, as an integral part of the degree BSc 
Life and Environmental Sciences and BSc Physical Sciences, is to 
educate the student in the theory and practice of Biochemical 
Techniques for isolation, separation, analysis and quan tification of bio -
molecules and to develop the students laboratory skills and practical 
knowledge in the application of isolation, separation and characterization 
techniques for bio -molecules.  
 
The second section will provide students with a general knowledge of 
basic principles in Enzymology (Enzymes, Enzyme Mechanisms and 
Enzyme Kinetics) that would equip them for a more in -depth study of 
Biochemistry in following years (e .g. Metabolism and Molecular Biology) 
as well as professional training, practice and postgraduate studies.  
 
This will serve as a basis for entry into the Biochemistry modules on 
second and third year level.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Recognize, determine  and demonstrate the working and calculation of buffers.  
• Name and recognize monomers and polymers of biomolecules.  
• Explain the principle involved in biochemical separation and analytical techniques.  
• Demonstrate the ability to design and develop simple protocols for biomolecule isolation, 
purification and characterization . 
• Describe, classify and recognize different enzymes, their functioning and application . 
• Define and describe the working of enzymes.  
• Acquire, analyse  and interpret enzymological data.  
• Understand the biochemical basis of enzyme regulation . 
 
 
SC.5.4 .3 BIOCHEMISTRY LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module BIC02B2   Integrated Metabolism and Control  
NQF Level    6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   BIC02A2  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the degree BSc 
Life and Environmental Sciences and BSc Physical Sciences is to 
develop the student’s understanding of scientific principles and methods 
related to the field of Metabolism (the sum total of enzym e-catalysed  
chemical reactions inside living cells, anabolism, catabolism and energy 
generation) and the integration thereof; as well as the laboratory skills 
and practical knowledge related to Metabolism, that is required as a 
basis for entry into the thi rd year of study. The module would also equip 
the student for postgraduate studies, professional training and practice.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Have knowledge of and comprehend the principles and theories governing carbohydrate,  lipid, 
protein and nucleic acid metabolism.  
• Interpret the related mechanisms of regulation and be able to compare the different ways  on 
metabolic control.  
• Grasp the overall concept of metabolism and indicate how it is integrated in terms of  energy 
metabolism.  
• Apply their knowledge to relevant applicable situations, e.g. how metabolism is influenced  by 
nutrition and exercise.  
 
   
   
103 SC.5. 4.4 BIOCHEMISTRY LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  BIC03A3   Molecular Biology  
NQF Level    7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  BIC02A2  and BIC02B2  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc Life 
and Environmental Sciences and BSc Physical Sciences degree is to 
provide students with a well -rounded and broad education concerning 
Biological Information Flow. The module will equip them with the 
scientific knowledge base, theory and methodology of Molecular 
Genetics which is the study of genes and their activities  at the molecular 
level. This module strongly emphasizes the techniques and methodology 
leading to molecular processes that will enable students to understand 
the applications of molecular biology which forms a fundamental part of 
the knowledge base in Lif e and Environmental Sciences. The module 
also equips the student for entry into the labour market, professional 
training and practice or postgraduate studies.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Name and define different Mendelian principles and biological information flow.  
• Differentiate between and select appropriate techniques that can be employed in  Molecular 
Biology and Biotechnology.  
• Relate, compare and discriminate between components of prokaryotic biological information 
flow. 
• Relate, compare and discriminate between components of eukaryotic biological information 
flow. 
 
 
SC.5. 4.5 BIOCHEMISTRY LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module BIC03B3   Molecular Physiology  
NQF Level    7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  BIC02A2  and BIC02B2  
Purpose  The purpose of this module (Molecular Physiology, concerned with the 
biochemistry of specialized physiological processes) as an integral part 
of the BSc Life and Environmental Sciences and BSc Physical Sciences 
qualification with Biochemistry as major; is to integrate the knowledge 
obtained in the second and third years of study. It provides students with 
an understanding of the theory, the scientific principles and methods 
related to the field of molecular and cellular communication and 
extracellular bioch emistry. In addition, laboratory skills and practical 
knowledge about procedures to investigate and solve biochemical 
problems are learned as well as the necessary skills in data collection, 
statistical analysis and presentation of results that would equip  the 
student for entry into professional training, practice and postgraduate 
studies.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Comment on the composition, role and classification of different  membranes, and  bacterial cell 
walls.  
• Organize the endocrine system and related hormones in terms of origin (organs or  tissue), structure, 
transduction mechanisms and effects.  
• Evaluate the different mechanisms involved in host -pathogen interaction, including  apoptosis.  
• Formulate an overview of muscle structure and function as well as the cytoskeleton.  
• Organize blood cells as red and white based on origin, composition and function and  explain 
haemostasis and thrombosis.  
• Formulate the collection of plasma proteins and immunoglobulins found in the plasma.  
• Criticise various immunological techniques and formulate their appropriate use.  
• Prepare a critique on the human genome project and the management thereof.  
• Comment on HIV/AIDS in the context of Southern Africa.   
   
104  
SC.5. 5  BIOLOGY                          BIO 
 
Practicals form an integral part of the theory discussed during lectures.  A sub -minimum of 50% for 
practicals is required for admission to semester examinations in Biology. A student repeating a 
module will only be given practical exemption for that module if a minimum of 50% for the practical 
work was obtained in the previous year. The Biochemistry department has formal minimum 
requirements that have to  be met to allow entry to final summative assessments.  Unsatisfactory 
attendance of lectures or (where applicable) participation in an electronic learning environment and 
practicals is taken into consideration when unsatisfactory progress in a student’s s tudies is 
determined.  
 
Practicals  
•  All practicals have to  be attended and practical assignments/reports have to be submitted on or 
before the indicated dates.  Practical classes form an integral part of the module and NO student 
will be excused from practical classes.  
•  Practical classes are compulsory and count towards the semester mark. If an assessment 
opportunity of whatever kind is missed due to illness or death of immediate family, an original 
medical certificate with a valid medical condition or other applicable  certificate plus the 
Application for Deferred test/final assessment (in the Appendix section of this guide) MUST be 
completed by a reputable general practitioner or a death certificate must be handed in not later 
than 3 days after the missed practical or test. Failure to do so will result in a mark of zero being 
allocated.  The absence from any practical without reason will result in a semester mark of 
"incomplete". A maximum of 2 practical sessions may be missed with valid reasons. If more than 
2 practical sessions are missed, even with valid reasons, the student will be gi ven an “incomplete” 
mark which will result in no exam entrance.  
•  Absence from a practical session must be motivated by a doctor’s certificate with a valid medical 
condition. This only excuses the student from the practical session; a report must still be handed 
in when returning to university - before starting the ne xt practical session. The class test (if there 
is one) for the missed practical/tutorial class must also be written.  
•  In addition to weekly practical reports, a practical exam is written quarterly. The combined mark 
for the practical reports and the practical exams must be at least 50% to gain admission to the 
final theory assessment opportunity.  
•  The practical mark contributes 40% of the module mark. The calculation of the module mark and 
the contribution of the practical component thereto, are explained in the respective study guides. 
If a student fails the final assessment exam, he/she can obt ain exemption from repeating the 
practical component of a module if the combined final mark for the practical reports and practical 
exam was greater than 50%.  
 
Theory  
Class attendance is very important to master the theory component of the Biology module. Tests 
and tutorials are compulsory and all formal formative assessment marks count towards the module 
mark.  
•  Tests and tutorials are compulsory and count towards the module/semester mark. If an 
assessment opportunity of whatever kind is missed due to illness or death of immediate family, 
an original medical certificate with a valid medical condition or other a pplicable certificate plus 
the Application for Deferred test/final assessment (in the Appendix section of this guide) MUST 
be completed by a reputable general practitioner or a death certificate must be handed in not 
later than 3 days after the missed test . Failure to do so will result in a mark of zero being allocated.  
•  In the determination of the module/semester mark, the mark attained in the theoretical 
assessment is given a weight of 60% and the practical mark a weight of 40%. The calculation of 
the module mark and the contribution/weighting of the theory and practi cal components thereto, 
are explained in the respective study guides.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
105 SC.5. 5.1 BIOLOGY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module BIO1EB1   Biology 1A1E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Purpose  To provide the students with the basic knowledge and understanding 
of the principles of biology that is applicable to Biochemistry, Botany 
and Zoology. The content and activities of the module serve to give 
students the relevant understanding of matters th at are fundamental 
to the later modules in Life and Environmental Science.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand the different themes that unify the study of life and demonstrate the methodology 
of the scientific inquiry.  
• Understand the basic principles of chemistry as it relates to inorganic and organic molecules 
and relate the molecular structure of biomolecules to their respective molecular function.  
• Justify why the cell can be considered the basic unit of life, distinguish between pro - and 
eukaryotic cells and relate the molecular structure of cellular organelles and the biological 
membrane to their function.  
• Consider cellular metabolic concepts such as central role of ATP and the central role of aerobic 
cellular respiration and photosynthesis to life.  
• Examine cellular reproduction (meiosis), the fundamental principles of inheritance as well as 
the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to proteins in the cell (replication, transcription, 
translation).   
• Understand the origin of the Protista and examine the phylum’s characteristics and life cycles.  
• Compare the developmental differences between protostomes and deuterostomes in relation 
to the classification of the different phyla of the Kingdom Animalia . 
• Understand the basic stages of animal development (fertilization, cleavage and gastrulation) 
and relate this to the germ layers that form as well as structures these layers eventually give 
rise to.  
• Understand the adaptation of vascular plants to life on land and distinguish between 
angiosperms and gymnosperms, and mon ocots and eudicots.  
• Explore resource acquisition and transport in vascular system of plants.  
• Understand the relationship between soil -composition, -bacteria and -fungi with plant nutrition.  
• Consider the role of flowers and fruits in the angiosperm life cycle and describe sexual 
reproduction in flowering plants.  
• Discuss how food crops can be modified using techniques of breeding and genetic engineering.  
• Develop the general skills (e.g., observation, problem solving, hypothesis generation and 
testing) used in science and familiarize themselves with various laboratory techniques.  
 
 
SC.5. 5.2 BIOLOGY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module BIO2EA1   Biology 1A2E  
NQF Level    5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisite   BIO1A1E  
Purpose  To provide the students with the basic knowledge and understanding 
of the principles of biology that is applicable to Biochemistry, Botany 
and Zoology. The content and activities of the module serve to give 
students the relevant understanding of matters th at are fundamental to 
the later modules in Life and Environmental Science.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand the different themes that unify the study of life and demonstrate the methodology 
of the scientific inquiry.  
• Understand the basic principles of chemistry as it relates to inorganic and organic molecules 
and relate the molecular structure of bio -molecules to their respective molecular function.  
• Justify why the cell can be considered the basic unit of life, distinguish between pro - and 
eukaryotic cells and relate the molecular structure of cellular organelles and the biological 
membrane to their function.   
   
106 • Consider cellular metabolic concepts such as central role of ATP and the central role of aerobic 
cellular respiration and photosynthesis to life.  
• Examine cellular reproduction (meiosis), the fundamental principles of inheritance as well as 
the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to proteins in the cell (replication, transcription, 
translation).   
• Develop the general skills (e.g., observation, problem solving, hypothesis generation and 
testing) used in science and familiarize themselves with various laboratory techniques.  
SC.5. 5.3 BIOLOGY LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module BIO10A1   Biology 1A  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Purpose  To provide the students with the basic knowledge and 
understanding of the principles of biology , that is applicable to 
Biochemistry, Botany and Zoology. The content and activities of 
the module serve to give students the relevant understanding of 
matters that are fundamental to the later modules in Life and 
Environmental Sciences.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand the different themes that unify the study of life and demonstrate the methodology 
of the scientific inquiry.  
• Understand the basic principles of chemistry as it relates to inorganic and organic molecules 
and relate the molecular structure of biomolecules to their respective molecular function.  
• Justify why the cell can be considered the basic unit of life, distinguish between pro - and 
eukaryotic cells and relate the molecular structure of cellular organelles and the biological 
membrane to their function.  
• Consider cellular metabolic concepts such as central role of ATP and the central role of aerobic 
cellular respiration and photosynthesis to life.  
• Examine cellular reproduction (meiosis), the fundamental principles of inheritance as well as 
the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to proteins in the cell (replication, transcription, 
translation).   
• Understand the origin of the Protista and examine the phylum’s characteristics and life cycles.  
• Compare the developmental differences between protostomes and deuterostomes in relation 
to the classification of the different phyla of the Kingdom Animalia  
• Understand the basic stages of animal development (fertilization, cleavage and gastrulation) 
and relate this to the germ layers that form as well as structures these layers eventually give 
rise to.  
• Understand the adaptation of vascular plants to life on land and distinguish between 
angiosperms and gymnosperms, and mon ocots and eudicots.  
• Explore resource acquisition and transport in vascular system of plants.  
• Understand the relationship between soil -composition, -bacteria and -fungi with plant nutrition.  
• Consider the role of flowers and fruits in the angiosperm life cycle and describe sexual 
reproduction in flowering plants.  
• Discuss how food crops can be modified using techniques of breeding and genetic engineering.  
• Develop the general skills (e.g., observation, problem solving, hypothesis generation and 
testing) used in science and familiarize themselves with various laboratory techniques.  
 
 
 
 
SC.5. 6  BOTANY AND PLANT BIOTECHNOLOGY                                                   BOT  
 
 
Chemistry 1A  or 1C and Chemistry 1B  or CEM1D  are compulsory modules for Botany as a major 
subject. Botany 2B  is normally a prerequisite for admission to Botany 3A  but exemption from this 
requirement may be granted in exceptional cases by the Head of Department.  
 
Excursions :   
Participation in one extended excursion is compulsory for all students in Botany 3B . 
Botany 2B  and 3B may only be taken in the same year with the approval of the Head of Depart ment . 
  
   
107 Practicals : 
BOT01B1  = 1 x 3 hour per week  
BOT02A2  = 1 x 7 hour per week  
BOT02B2  = 1 x 7  hour per week  
BOT03A3  = 1 x 7  hour per week  
BOT03B3  = 1 x 7  hour per week  
 
The relative weightings for determining the module mark applied to theory and practical 
assessments are:  (Theory  : Practical)  
 
BOT01B1  70:30 
BOT02A2           no separate mark for theory and practicals  
BOT02B2           60:40 
BOT03A3           60/30/10 (last 10% for the assignment)  
BOT03B3           50:50 
                   
Attendance at prac tical classes is compulsory.  Absence from a practical class will only be 
condoned on presentation of a very good reason substantiated by a certificate from an acceptable 
source, this certificate to be submitted to the department within 5 working days.   Any student absent 
from a practical class without permission will not be per mitted entry to th e final assessment 
opportunity.  
 
 
SC.5. 6.1 BOTANY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module BOT01B1   Plant Diversity   
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   BIO10A1 or BIO 1A1E and BIO2EA1  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module is to provide students with a well -
rounded and broad education that equips them with knowledge to 
identify, name and classify plants, study vegetative features and use 
appropriate terminology useful in the identification of ( flowering) plants 
and have a basic understanding of the major groups of vascular and 
non-vascular plants and basic ecological concepts.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be  able to:  
• Name and classify plants.  
• Describe the vegetative and reproductive features and demonstrate the use of appropriate 
terminology that is useful in the identification of flowering plants.  
• Show a basic understanding of the major groups of vascular and non -vascular plants  
throughout the world.  
• Demonstrate knowledge of the major families of vascular plants, as well as the collection  and 
identification of local vascular plants.  
• Define, explain  and explore fundamental concepts of ecology and population and community 
ecology.  
 
 
SC.5. 6.2 BOTANY   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module BOT02A2   Plant Anatomy and Cytology  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  BIO10A1 or BIO2EA1 and BOT01B1  and CEM01A1 or CEM1 AC1 
and CEM01B1 or CEM1DB1  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module is to provide students with a basic 
knowledge of the structure and function of plant cells, tissues and 
organs, and to become familiar with basic light microscopic techniques 
applicable to investigations of plant material  especially for identification 
purposes.  This will equip students with knowledge of anatomy and 
cytology fundamental to all botanical studies.   
   
108 Module learning outc omes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe, as well as compare and contrast, the structure of eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, 
and point out and explain the relationship between structure and function of the various cell 
components.  
• Prepare temporary, semi -permanent and permanent microscope mounts of fresh material by 
means of epidermal peels and hand sections and simple staining techniques, as well as 
construct scale bars and calculate magnifications.  
• Examine microscope slides, diagrams, micrographs and ultra -micrographs, and identify, 
describe, draw and interpret the various plant organs, tissues, cells and cell components.  
• Explain why plant anatomy is studied and describe how it can be used for identification and 
related purposes, and be able to use and apply appropriate tests and procedures in order to 
investigate material microscopically for these purposes.  
• Describe, explain, compare, classify, record and distinguish between the various simple and 
complex plant tissues, as well as primary and secondary tissues, and the various cell types 
within these categories, describe how they are structurally suited to pe rform their functions and 
how this relates to their commercial value.  
• Describe, explain and compare the basic anatomy of roots, stems and leaves (of 
monocotyledons and dicotyledons) as well as of flowers, to identify these organs from sections, 
recognize and explain adaptations to different environmental conditions and draw line diagrams 
to show the distribution of tissues.  
• Plan and carry out a logical, comprehensive anatomical investigation of a selected plant which 
includes producing suitable slides, illustrations and working with units using an estimation 
technique.  
 
 
SC.5. 6.3 BOTANY   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module BOT02B2   Plant Physiology  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  BIO10A1 or BIO2EA1 and BOT01B1  and CEM01A1 or CEM1 AC1 
and CEM01B1 or CEM1DB1  
Purpose  The purpose of this module as an integral part of the Life and 
Environmental Science programme is to provide the student with a 
well-rounded  and broad education that equips them with a theoretical 
and practical knowledge base in plant physiology that could serve as a 
basis for entry into postgraduate studies in plant physiology.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe the sub -cellular components and their functions.  
• Describe the properties of water, discuss plant water relations, explain the process of 
transpiration, specify the different mineral elements essential to plant growth and give details 
about their functions, deficiency symptoms, uptake and transport from c ell to cell and 
demonstrate the application of mineral nutrition in agriculture.  
• Categorize enzymes and describe and explain their composition and functioning.  
• Expound on the process of respiration, lipid metabolism and photosynthesis and their roles in 
the control of plant growth and development.  
• Explain the translocation of solutes in the plant.  
• Illustrate how plant hormones orchestrate the different processes involved in plant growth and 
development and examine plant growth and development in terms of movement, 
photomorphogenesis, photoperiodism, vernalisation, dormancy and seed germination.  
• Describe the different groups of secondary plant products and some of their uses.  
• Conduct practical work and experiments that illustrate the processes, principles and 
applications of plant growth and development; design, construct and conduct experiments that 
will illustrate specific aspects of growth and development; and to write repor ts that appraise the 
results of these experiments.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
109 SC.5.6 .4 BOTANY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module BOT03A3  Biotechnology  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Presentation  Semester 1 
Prerequisites  BIO10A1 or BIO 1A1E and BIO2EA1,  BOT01B1,  BOT02A2, 
BOT02B2 and CEM01A1 or CEM1AC1 and CEM01B1 or 
CEM1DB1  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
qualification is to provide students with a well -rounded and broad 
education that equips them with the scientific knowledge base, theory 
and methodology of Plant Biotechnology that could serve a s a basis 
for entry into postgraduate studies or as a research scientist in the field 
of biology and the life sciences.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the concept of biotechnology and concepts related to the field.  
• Describe the composition of plant genomes and genes and their relevance to plant  genetic 
engineering.  
• Describe, understand and elaborate on the biotechnological aspects of plant manipulation  and 
cultivation.  
• Describe and apply several techniques in the field of plant recombinant DNA technology.  
• Conduct practical work and experiments that illustrate and exemplify the techniques and  
applications of recombinant DNA technology and plant tissue culture.  
• Write an appropriate scientific essay and report.  
• Give appropriate presentations on assignments given.  
 
 
SC.5.6 .5 BOTANY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module BOT03B3  Plant Taxonomy  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  BIO10A1 or BIO 1A1E and BIO2EA1,  BOT01B1,  BOT02A2, 
BOT02B2, CEM01A1 or CEM1AC1 and CEM01B1 or CEM1DB1  
Purpose  Purpose of module: The primary purpose of this module as an integral 
part of Life and Environmental Sciences is to provide students with a 
well-rounded and broad education that equips them with the necessary 
taxonomic, nomenclatural and floristic knowledge  base, theory and 
methodology.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Distinguish and identify any indigenous seed plant to the level of family and genus, using  
appropriate identification keys and microscope techniques.  
• Distinguish between selected representatives of all the major plant families, the dominant and 
characteristic plant species of all the biomes and selected vegetation types of South Africa and 
well-known indigenous and exotic plants of commercial and hortic ultural importance.  
• Describe and explain the history, principles and methods of plant classification (both  phenetic 
and cladistic approaches), and generate phenograms and cladograms using  small data sets.  
• Explain the principles, methods and application of plant nomenclature (scientific naming  of 
plants).  
• Categorize the various types of taxonomic evidence used in plant classification, including the 
correct use of descriptive terminology.  
• Compare and explain the basic methodologies used in plant classification and plant  survey 
work, including plant collecting, botanical survey work and the role of various types of herbaria 
and botanical gardens and how they function.  
• Assess and contrast the biomes and major vegetation types of South Africa in terms of 
environmental parameters, structure, function and dominant species, based on a sound 
knowledge of the basic principles of plant ecology, including the behaviour and ecolo gical role 
of fire in grasslands, savannah  and fynbos.  
  
   
110  
SC.5. 7  CHEMISTRY                                                                                                   CEM  
 
Prerequisites  
A pass of at least 60% in CEM1AC1  for CEM01B1  and 65% in CEM2EC1 , CEM13CE for CEM01B1  
Chemistry 1A  and 1B01 for all second and third year modules  
CEM01A2 , CEM02A2 , CEM01B2  and CEM02B2  for CEM02A3 , CEM01A3 , CEM02B3  and 
CEM01B3  
 
Practicals  
Practicals  are compulsory for all modules in Chemistry.  
 
  1 x 3 hours per week:  CEM01A1 , 1B, 1C, 1D 
 
  1 x 6 hours per week:  CEM01A2 , 2A2, 2B1, 2B2 
CEM01A3 , 3A2, 3B1, 3B2 
 
Practicals  form an integral part of the theory discussed in the modules.  
A sub-minimum  of 50% for practicals is required for admission to semester examinations in 
Chemistry.  
 
Examination  
Apart from the sub-minimum  of 50% for practical work, the candidate must have a final semester 
mark (practical work + theoretical tests) of at least 40% for admission to the semester examination.  
The final mark is the average of the semester mark and the examination mark. The final pass mark 
for a module is 50%. A sub-minimum  of 40% must be achieved in the examination (irrespective of 
the semester mark) to pass the module.  
 
Tests, Tutorials and Practicals  
1. Tests, tutorials and practicals are compulsory and count towards the semester mark.  If an 
assessment opportunity of any kind is missed due to illness, an original medical certificate for 
a valid medical condition plus the Application for Deferred test/final assessment MUST be 
completed by a reputable general practitioner and must be handed in not later than 3 days 
after the missed practical or test. Failure to do so will result in a mark of zero being allocated. 
In case of other reasons for not attendin g an assessment opportunity an appropriate certificate 
or affidavit must accompany the Application for a deferred test. The Department may reject 
the application on grounds of insufficient justification.  
2. A sub -minimum of 50% for practical assessments is required for admission to the exams in all 
Chemistry Department modules.  
3. A student will only be allowed to miss one practical per module with valid documentation as 
set out in (1) above. If more than one practical is missed, the student will get a “Practical 
Incomplete” grading and will not be allowed entrance to the examina tion. 
4. A student repeating a module will only be given exemption for the practical component of that 
module if 50% for the practical work was obtained in the previous year.  
5. In the determination of the module semester mark the mark attained in the theoretical 
assessment is given a weight of approximately 75% and the practical mark a weight of 
approximately 25%. There may, however, be deviations from this in individual modules.  
Please consult study guides for individual modules for the percentages pertaining to each 
module.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.1 CHEMISTRY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  CEM1EA1  Chemical Principles  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    4 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Purpose  To develop the student ’s knowledge and comprehension of 
introductory chemical principles and techniques.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Make use of a calculator for scientific notation calculations  
• Solve problems relating to rounding of figures and the use of significant figures   
   
111 • Convert between different units of mass, length, time, volume and temperature  
• Describe the structure of atoms, ions, anions, cations and simple molecules  
• Distinguish between molar mass, atomic mass and formula mass and do calculations related 
to these concepts  
• Distinguish between different type of chemical reactions (combustion, combination, single 
displacement, dissolving of salts and acids in water) and write the corresponding chemical 
equations.  
• Identify a limiting reactant through mole -ratios, calculate percentage yield in chemical reactions 
and perform stoichiometric calculations.  
• Describe and do basic calculations on the behaviour of gases with changes in pressure, 
volume, temperature and amount.  
• Do basic stoichiometric calculations involving solutions.  
• Compare different acid -base models and do simple calculations relating to acid -base 
chemistry.  
 
 
SC.5.7 .2 CHEMISTRY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  CEM2EB1  Introduction to General Chemistry  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    10 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Purpose  To develop the students’  knowledge and comprehension of 
chemical principles and techniques. Additionally, the module 
aims to develop the technical abilities of the student through 
practical experience in the laboratory.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and use chemical vocabulary  
• Perform chemical calculations  
• Identify a limiting reactant through mole ratios, calculate percentage yield in chemical reactions 
and perform stoichiometric calculations  
• Distinguish between the different types of chemical reactions (precipitation, complex formation, 
acid-base and redox reactions)   
• Apply the solubility rules in precipitation reactions  
• Define oxidation and reduction and determine oxidation numbers  
• Identify redox reactions and balance these using half reactions  
• Explain and apply the concepts of modern atomic theory  
• Explain the causes and consequences of periodicity  
• Demonstrate the ability to perform laboratory experiments, interpret the results and write a 
report.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.3 CHEMISTRY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  CEM3EA1   General Chemistry  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Purpose  To introduce students to more advanced concepts and 
techniques in within general chemistry. Additionally, the module 
aims to develop the technical abilities of the student through 
practical experience in the laboratory.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply the principles of atomic and molecular structure to solve problems related to chemical 
bonding and molecular shapes  
• Describe the concept of dynamic equilibrium and write equilibrium constants equations  
• Predict the effect of stresses applied to systems in equilibrium  
• Discuss different acid -base theories and differentiate between weak and strong acids and 
bases   
   
112 • Perform quantitative calculations involving acid -base reactions (pH, pOH, [H 3O+], [OH-], K w, 
buffers)  
• Recognise simple organic functional groups  
• Demonstrate the ability to perform laboratory experiments, interpret the results and write a 
report.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.4 CHEMISTRY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module CEM01A1   Introduction to General Chemistry  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Purpose  To develop the students’  knowledge and comprehension of 
chemical principles and techniques within general chemistry which 
will serve as a fundamental basis for further studies in the physical 
and biological sciences and in engineering.  Additionally, the module 
aims to develop the technical abilities of the student through 
practical experience in the laboratory.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and use chemical vocabulary  
• Perform chemical calculations  
• Distinguish between the different types of chemical reactions (precipitation, complex      
formation, acid -base and redox reactions)  
• Identify a limiting reactant through mole ratios, calculate percentage yield in chemical  reactions 
and perform stoichiometric calculations  
• Apply the principles of atomic and molecular structure to solve problems related to  chemical 
bonding and molecular shapes  
• Describe the concept of dynamic equilibrium and write equilibrium constants equations  
• Predict the effect of stresses applied to systems in equilibrium  
• Discuss different acid -base theories and differentiate between weak and strong acids and 
bases.  
• Perform quantitative calculations involving acid -base reactions  
(pH, pOH, [H 3O+], [OH-], K w, buffers).  
• Define and apply the five gas laws for ideal gases; derive the density and molecular mass of 
gases from these laws and then apply stoichiometry to problems involving gas laws.  
• Provide a qualitative description of the gas laws based on the kinetic theory and then 
distinguish between an ideal and a real gas and apply this with the use of the Van der Waal’s 
equation.  
• Explain and differentiate between effusion and diffusion  
• Recognise simple organic functional groups and reaction mechanisms.  
• Demonstrate the ability to perform laboratory experiments, interpret the results and write a 
report.  
 
SC.5. 7.5 CHEMISTRY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   CEM2EC1   Chemistry 1C2E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 2 
Purpose  To introduce and develop the students’ knowledge and 
comprehension of chemical principles and techniques.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and use chemical vocabulary.  
• Perform chemical calculations and do appropriate conversions.  
• Distinguish between the different types of matter and their properties.  
• Understand the Periodic Table of the elements  
• Perform stoichiometric calculations.  
• Apply the principles of atomic and molecular structure to solve problems related to chemical 
bonding and molecular shapes.  
  
   
113 SC.5. 7.6 CHEMISTRY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   CEM3EC1   Chemistry 1C3E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Purpose  Building on CEM2EC1 , to further develop the students’ 
knowledge and comprehension of chemical principles and 
techniques within general chemistry which will serve as a 
fundamental basis for further studies in physical and biological 
sciences. Additionally, the module aims to develop the technical 
abilities of the student through practical experience in the 
laboratory.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe the behaviour of gases.  
• Describe various kinds of solutions.  
• Describe the concept of dynamic equilibrium and write equilibrium constant equations.  
• Predict the effect of stresses applied to systems in equilibrium.  
• Discuss the different acid -base theories and differentiate between weak and strong acids and 
bases.  
• Correlate the terms endothermic and exothermic with the heat flow between a system and its 
surroundings and interpret enthalpy, entropy and free energy and know its implications.  
• Interpret nuclide symbols.  
• Write balanced equations for nuclear processes and perform half -life calculations.  
• Demonstrate the ability to perform laboratory experiments, interpret the results and write a 
report  
 
 
SC.5. 7.7 CHEMISTRY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   CEM1AC1   Introduction to General C hemistry for Biological & Earth Science  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Purpose  To develop the students’  knowledge and comprehension of 
chemical principles and techniques within general chemistry which 
will serve as a fundamental basis for further studies in the physical 
and biological sciences and in engineering.  Additionally, the module 
aims to develop the technical abilities of the student through 
practical experience in the laboratory.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and use chemical vocabulary.  
• Perform chemical calculations and do appropriate conversions.  
• Distinguish between the different types of matter and their properties.  
• Understand the Periodic Table of the elements.  
• Perform stoichiometric calculations.  
• Apply the principles of atomic and molecular structure to solve problems related to chemical 
bonding and molecular shapes.  
• Describe the behaviour  of gases.  
• Describe various kinds of solutions.  
• Describe the concept of dynamic equilibrium and write equilibrium constant equations.  
• Predict the effect of stresses applied to systems in equilibrium.  
• Discuss the different acid -base theories and differentiate between weak and strong acids and 
bases.  
• Correlate the terms endothermic and exothermic with the heat flow between a system and its 
surroundings and interpret enthalpy, entropy and free energy and know its implications.  
• Interpret nuclide symbols.  
• Write balanced equations for nuclear processes and perform half -life calculations.  
• Demonstrate the ability to perform laboratory experiments, interpret the results and write a 
report . 
  
   
114 ARTICULATION TO CHEMISTRY ON SECOND YEAR LEVEL  
 
Students achieving at least 60%  in CEM 1C may register for CEM01B1  instead of CEM1DB1 . Once 
the combination of CEM1AC1  and CEM01B1  is passed, a student may register for Chemistry at 
Second Year Level. The combination of CEM1AC1  and CEM1DB1  does not allow a student to 
register for Second Year Chemistry modules.  
Modules CEM2EC1  and CEM3EC1  together constitute CEM1AC1 . However, students who register 
for these modules must demonstrate more exceptional performance and require an average mark 
of at least 65%  in the two modules in order to register for CEM01B1 . 
 
 
SC.5. 7.8 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module CEM1DB1  Environmental Chemistry: Atmosphere, Hydrosphere and Soil  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Pre-requisite  CEM1AC1  
Purpose  To develop the students basic understanding of atmospheric 
chemistry with special reference to modern energy supply and the 
implications thereof for the for the earth's atmosphere. To develop 
the students understanding of scientific principles relating to the 
hydrosphere and lithosphere that forms the basis for environmental 
modules.  
Only students who do not wish to continue with Chemistry or Biochemistry on second year level 
may register for CEM1AC1  and CEM1DB1 . 
 
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the factors involved in energy production, including conversion of energy and the 
efficiency of energy conversion.  
• Discuss the formation and composition of fossil fuels and to apply this knowledge to the 
identification of possible environmental implications.  
• Differentiate between renewable and non -renewable energy sources and identify the 
advantages and disadvantages of each.  
• Identify the layers of the atmosphere and explain the composition thereof.  
• Explain stratospheric chemistry, including the formation, chemistry and destruction of the 
ozone layer.  
• Identify types and sources of air pollutants and their impact on the environment, including 
phenomena like acid rain, photochemical smog, particulates and organic contaminants.  
• Explain the causes and effects of global warming and the greenhouse effect.  
• Demonstrate understanding of the composition of natural waters, including the role of O 2, CO 2, 
carbonates, nitrates, phosphides, natural buffer systems and solubility.  
• Discuss the processes involved in water treatment and purification  
• Apply knowledge of the composition and chemistry of water to problem solving regarding toxic 
metal pollution in the environment.  
• Identify simple organic compounds and classify them by functional groups, predict products of 
simple organic reactions.  
• Assess the factors that contribute to the nature of different soils including chemical 
composition, crystals, rock -forming minerals and their role as adsorbents for pollutants.  
• Demonstrate the ability to perform laboratory experiments, interpret the results and write a 
report.  
 
ARTICULATION TO CHEMISTRY ON SECOND YEAR LEVEL  
Students achieving at least 60% in CEM1AC1  can register for CEM 01B1 instead  of CEM1DB1 .  Once 
the combination of CEM1AC1  + CEM 01B1 was passed a student may register for Chemistry on second 
year level.  The combination 1C and 1D does not allow a student to register for Chemistry 2 modules.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
115  
SC.5. 7.9 CHEMISTRY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  CEM01B1  Introduction to Physical and Organic Chemistry  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or CEM1EA1 , 1EA2 and 1 EA3 or a final mark of at 
least 60% for CEM1AC1 . 
Purpose  To introduce students to the concepts of thermochemistry, 
thermodynamics,  basic kinetics (zero and first order reactions), 
solution chemistry and electrochemistry  in relation to 
technological advancement. To develop the students’ 
understanding of foundational organic chemistry, introducing the 
student to synthesis and the importance of organic compounds 
in living systems. The student acquires an appreciation of 
functional group transformations and stereochemistry. 
Introductory laboratory skills are imparted to the student via 
experiments involving some synthesis and comparative 
techniques.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and apply principles and definitions of thermochemistry.  
• Apply stoichiometry to and differentiate between heat capacity and specific heat obtained from 
calorimetric data.  
• Apply Hess's Law of heat summation.  
• Define and apply the state functions and standard reference form used in the first (internal 
energy, enthalpy), second (entropy), and third laws of thermodynamics.  
• Relate and apply Gibbs free -energy concepts to equilibrium constant expressions.  
• Explain the solution process as well as define and explain the factors that affect solubility.  
• Identify and apply colligative properties of solutions as well as define and explain colloidal 
systems.  
• Explain the factors that affect reaction rates.  
• Apply and link the concepts of stoichiometry and reaction rates (limited to zero and first order 
reactions only).  
• Integrate and apply concepts of concentration, temperature and time to reaction rates (limited 
to zero and first order reactions only).  
• Explain and apply the principles of electrochemical cells.  
• Integrate and apply concepts in electrochemistry and thermodynamics related to 
electrochemical changes.  
• Demonstrate the required laboratory skills to perform practical work and describe the results 
obtained from the data.  
• Recognise and identify various functional groups in natural products as well as in synthetic 
materials  
• Transpose a structure into an IUPAC name and vice versa  
• Analyse, compare and differentiate between organic compounds, based on their 
stereochemistry and analysis of their conformations  
• Explain or suggest acceptable reaction mechanisms  
• Combine aspects of the above to propose viable products, starting materials and reagents for 
selected transformations  
• Predict reaction outcomes  
• Execute the synthesis and analysis of simple organic compounds in the laboratory  
• Write a complete and accurate report on all experiments  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
116  
SC.5. 7.10 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CEM01A2   Structural Inorganic Chemistry  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% for CEM1AC1 , CEM01B1 , MAT01A1  (or 
ASMA1A1  or MAT3EA1 ), MAT01B1  (or ASMA1B1 ). 
Purpose  Introduce students to the concepts involved in atomic -, molecular, 
and ionic structure, and to correlate these concepts with the 
reactivity and properties of inorganic compounds. The s-, p- and d-
block metals are examined with regard to  occurrence and recovery, 
and representative examples are introduced.  
To develop laboratory and practical skills in the application of 
physical methods to solve problems in inorganic chemistry.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply principles of atomic and molecular structures.  
• Demonstrate and apply the concepts of symmetry and group theory to molecular orbital theory.  
• Demonstrate and apply the concepts of covalent and ionic bonding to the stability and reactivity 
of inorganic compounds.  
• Distinguish, explain and apply valence -bond (VB) theory and molecular orbital  (MO)  theory.  
• Recognise and explain different ionic solids.  
• Explain the trends in chemical and physical properties of the main group elements and the d-
block metals and correlate  them with their inorganic structures.  
• Demonstrate the required laboratory skills to perform practical work and describe the  results 
obtained from the data.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.11 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CEM02A2   Intermediate Physical Chemistry  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% for CEM1AC1 , CEM01B1 , MAT01A1  (or 
ASMA1A1  or MAT3EA1 , MAT01B1  (or ASMA1B1 ). 
Purpose  The purpose of the module is to develop an understanding of 
scientific principles and methods as applied to chemical 
thermodynamics , kinetics and fundamental quantum mechanics to 
develop laboratory and practical skills in the application of physical 
methods to solve problems in physical chemistry . 
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply the principles of chemical thermodynamics in problems related to  heat capacity,  energy, 
enthalpy, entropy and Gibbs energy.  
• Apply the principles of reaction kinetics to determine rate laws and rate constants, to  predict 
variation in rate with temperature change, and to design simple reaction mechanisms.  
• Apply the laws of quantum mechanics to translational, vibrational and rotational motion.  
• Demonstrate practical skills in the application of physical methods to solve chemical  problems.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.12 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CEM01B2   Intermediate Organic Chemistry  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% in CEM1AC1 , CEM01B1 , MAT01A1  (or 
ASMA1A1  or MAT3EA1 ), MAT01B1  (or ASMA1B1 ).  
   
117 Purpose  To develop the student's knowledge and understanding of mono -
functional organic compounds, their reactivity, reaction mechanisms 
and how this information is relevant to the pharmaceutical, mining, 
petrochemical and related industries, as well as to living systems. 
Additionally, the module aims to enhance the technical abilities of 
the student through practical experience in the laboratory.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the reaction mechanisms of mono -functional organic compounds, including  alkenes, 
alkynes, alkyl halides, alcohols and selected carbonyl compounds  
• Predict and compare the chemical reactivity of mono -functional organic compounds  
• Propose syntheses for mono -functional organic materials  
• Predict the products of given organic reactions  
• Demonstrate the ability to carry out the synthesis and analysis of some organic  compounds in 
the laboratory  
 
 
SC.5.7 .13 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CEM02B2   Principles of Analytical Chemistry  
NQF Level   6 
Credits   10 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% CEM1AC1 , CEM01B1 , MAT01A1  (or ASMA1A1  
or MAT3EA1 ), MAT01B1  (or ASMA1B1 ). 
Purpose  To develop an understanding of the principles and practice of 
analytical chemistry, in particular  basic wet chemical techniques . To 
develop laboratory skills and practical knowledge in the application 
of volumetric  and gravimetric,  sample p reparation  techniques to  
solve problems related to chemical equilibrium . 
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the underlying principles and theory of wet chemical analysis . 
• Demonstrate proficiency in the application of wet chemical (gravimetric and volumetric) 
techniques in  qualitative and quantitative chemical analysis.  
• Apply selected statistical procedures in analytical data processing.  
• Explain the principles underlying the interaction of species in ionic solutions.  
• Characterise simple and complex equilibrium systems using theoretical calculations based on 
thermodynamic principles.  
• Calculate concentrations and equilibrium constants for equilibrium reactions.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.14 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CEM01A3   Advanced Physical Chemistry  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60%  in CEM1AC1  and CEM01B1 , CEM01A2 , 
CEM02A2 , CEM01B2 , CEM02B2 , MAT01A1 /ASMA1A1 / MAT3EA1  
and MAT01B1 / ASMA1B1 . 
Purpose  The purpose of the module is to develop an understanding of 
scientific principles and methods as applied to chemical kinetics and 
equilibrium  and quantum mechanical principles. To introduce 
surface chemistry and photochemistry and  to develop laboratory 
and practical skills in the application of physical methods to solve 
problems in physical chemistry.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Evaluate the order and molecularity of reactions based on principles and/or numerical 
examples.  
• Discuss the kinetics of multistep reactions based on molecular dynamics.  
• Hypothesise collision theory and transition state theory with respect to catalysis.  
• Compare the translational, vibrational and rotational motion of a particle.   
   
118 • Understand principles of surface chemistry and explain the difference between adsorption and 
absorption  
• Explain various physical and chemical events related to absorption of light and apply the theory 
to solving problems relating to photochemical reactions.  
• Integrate practical skills in the application of physical methods to solve chemical problems . 
 
 
SC.5. 7.15 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CEM02A3   Co-ordination Chemistry  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester  1 
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% in CEM1AC1  and CEM01B1 , MAT01A1 / 
ASMA1A1 /MAT3EA1 , MAT01B1 /ASMA1B1 , CEM01A2 , CEM01A2 , 
CEM02A2 , CEM01B2  and CEM02B2 . 
Purpose  The purpose of the module is to introduce students to bonding and 
reaction mechanisms in inorganic complexes. Knowledge of how 
these principles are applied to in industry is an integral part of this of 
the module. Practical that support the theory are carr ied out to equip 
students with laboratory skills; and report writing is a strong 
component of the practicals.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply the concepts of acids and bases in predicting the outcomes of reactions.  
• Demonstrate the ability to apply concepts of bonding and to use these bonding concepts to 
predict and/or explain the properties of metal complexes.  
• Apply basic knowledge of organometallic chemistry to predict and/or explain metal carbonyl 
chemistry.  
• Demonstrate laboratory skills in performing practicals in support of theory and to compile and 
interpret data obtained in experiments into a formal report.  
 
 
SC.5. 7.16 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CEM01B3   Instrumental Chemical Analysis  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% in CEM1AC1  and CEM01B1 , CEM01A2 , 
CEM02A2 , CEM01B2 , CEM02B2 , MAT01A1 /ASMA1A1 /MAT3EA1  
and MAT01B1 / ASMA1B1 . 
Purpose  To develop an understanding of the principles and practice analytical 
chemistry, in particular instrumental analysis. To develop laboratory 
skills and practical knowledge in the application of electrochemical , 
chromatographic  and spectroscopic  techniques to solve chemical 
problems.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the underlying principles and theory of electrochemical analysis in relation to 
potentiometry, electrogravimetry, coulom etry and chromatographic techniques with emphasis 
on HPLC and  ion chromatography.  
• Explain the origins of atomic and molecular spectra and the processes of atomic and molecular 
absorption, emission and fluorescence.  
• Identify the different instrumental components in ultraviolet -visible, flame atomic absorption 
(FAAS), flame atomic emission (FAES), and fluoresce spectrometers (FS).  
• Compare and contrast sample introduction techniques in UV -VIS, FAAS, FAES, and FS.  
• Understand strategies for correcting sample matrix effects in atomic spectroscopic 
measurements.  
• Utilize UV -VIS, FAAS, FEAS, and FS in qualitative and quantitative chemical analysis.  
• Demonstrate proficiency in the laboratory application of chromatographic separations , 
electrochemical and spectroscopic techniques to solve problems in trace  analysis . 
 
  
   
119 SC.5. 7.17 CHEMISTRY    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CEM02B3   Advanced Organic Chemistry  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  CEM01A1  or 60% in CEM1AC1  and CEM01B1 , CEM01A2 , 
CEM02A2 , CEM01B2 , CEM02B2 , MAT01A1 /ASMA1A1 /MAT3EA1  
and MAT01B1 /ASMA1B1 . 
Purpose  To develop the students’ understanding of multifunctional 
compounds, their synthesis and their reactivity. In addition, the 
student is introduced to aromatic chemistry, NMR spectroscopy of 
organic compounds and to pericyclic reactions.  The module is 
desig ned to further develop the practical skills of the student through 
laboratory work.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate an understanding of chemical reactivity and reaction mechanisms of aromatic 
compounds, and account for the unusual stability of aromatic compounds in comparison with 
aliphatic analogues.  Various approaches to the synthesis of aromatic compounds should be 
able to be compared with the view to designing a viable synthesis of multifunctional aromatic 
products.  
• Show an understanding of the reactions and reaction mechanisms of carbonyl compounds.  
This understanding should be used to evaluate a synthetic protocol to be applied to the 
synthesis of carbonyl compounds and to propose methods of preparing such material s. 
• Identify some organic materials on the basis of NMR spectroscopy.  
• Predict the outcomes of some pericyclic reactions based on FMO theory.  
• Show competence in the synthesis and characterisation of some organic compounds in the 
laboratory and to write a report on the outcomes of the experiments.  
 
 
 
SC.5. 8  COMPUTER SCIENCE                                                                                   CSC  
 
 
Lectures, Tutorials, Practicals and Assessment Criteria  
 
1. Tests, tutorials  and practical classes are compulsory and count towards the semester mark.   If 
an assessment opportunity of whatever kind is missed due to illness or death of immediate 
family, an original medical certificate with a valid medical condition  or other applicable certificate 
plus the Application for Deferred test/final assessment (in the Appendix section of this guide) 
MUST be completed by a reputable general practitioner or a death certificate must be handed 
in not later than 7 days  after the missed practical or test.   Failure to do so will result in a mark 
of zero being allocated.  
 
2. Practical classes form an integral part of the module and NO student will be excused from 
practical classes. Absence from a practical session must be motivated by a doctor’s certificate 
with a valid medical condition (see above). The procedure pertainin g to absence from practical 
sessions will be detailed in each module’s study guide respectively.  
 
3. With the exception of Informatics 3B NO exemption from practical classes is applicable for 
modules that are repeated. A student repeating Informatics 3B will only be given exemption for 
the practical component of that module if a pass percentage was obt ained for the group project 
in the previous year. If a pass percentage was not obtained in the group project the student will 
be required to complete a mini -project.  
 
4. In the determination of the module semester mark the mark attained in the theoretical 
assessment and the practical mark is taken into account.  This weighting is provided in the study 
guide of each module.  
 
5. A sub -minimum of 5 0% for practicals is required for admission to semester examinations in 
Computer Science and Informatics.   
   
120  
6. A student needs a semester mark of 40% to gain entrance to the final assessment opportunity. 
The semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student needs a final mark of 50% 
to pass a module. The semester mark also contributes to the result of a  supplementary 
assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is capped on 50%.  
 
 
SC.5. 8.1 COMPUTER SCIENCE   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module CSC01A1   Introduction to algorithm development (C++)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisite   Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 6  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
Information Technology program is to provide information technology 
professionals who can identify, evaluate and solve problems associated 
with the Information Technology  discipline  in Sou th Africa and 
internationally.  This module prepares student to analyse , design and 
develop algorithms into programs demonstrating correctness using a 
visual computer language.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Analyse, Design and interpret an algorithm  
• Program algorithms in an object oriented language such as C++.  
• Use a computer to solve programming problems.  
• Demonstrate computer programs in C++.  
 
 
SC.5.8 .2 COMPUTER SCIENCE LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module CSC01B1   Introduction to data structures (C++)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Computer Science 1A ( CSC01A1 ) 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
Information Technology programme is to provide IT professionals who 
can identify, evaluate and solve problems associated with the 
information technology discipline in South Africa and abroad . The 
module prepares the student to analyse , design and develop object 
oriented programming solutions demonstrating correctness using a 
visual computer language. Students are introduced to fundamental 
data structures in preparation for a more rigorous the oretical treatment 
of the subject matter in their final year.  In addition students are 
introduced to external data structures and data abstraction by way of 
the stream metaphor forming the foundation for network computing in 
second year.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the meaning of abstract data types.  
• Implement internal data structures such as linked lists.  
• Explain internal data structures such as stacks and queues.  
• Apply external data types such as sequential and direct files.  
• Compare the object oriented programming paradigm and the component approach to program 
development.  
• Develop object oriented programs in a computer language such as C++.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
121 SC.5. 8.3 COMPUTER SCIENCE LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CSC02A2   Object -Oriented Programming  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  Computer Science 1A ( CSC01A1 ) and  
Computer Science 1B ( CSC01B1 ) 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc  (IT) 
programme is to provide IT professionals who can identify, evaluate 
and solve problems associated with the IT discipline in South -Africa as 
well as in the International context. The module further ensures that 
students have sufficient theoretical and practical knowledge to apply 
object -oriented principles. The student is also introduced to concurrent 
processing, executable content over the Internet and portable software.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Distinguish between classes and objects.  
• Explain object -oriented principles.  
• Apply object -oriented principles during the development of programs.  
• Explain the role of graphic interfaces, events, processes and threads.  
• Develop programs that implement graphic user interfaces, events, processes and threads.  
• Explain the principles of distributed processing.  
 
 
SC.5. 8.4 COMPUTER SCIENCE LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CSC02B2   Data Communications  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Computer Science 2A ( CSC02A2 ) 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module, as integral part of the BSc IT 
programme, is to provide IT professionals who can identify, evaluate 
and solve problems associated with the IT discipline in South Africa, 
as well as internationally. The module provides st udents with a 
thorough grounding in network oriented programming in an object 
oriented programming language such as Java or C++ along with both 
a theoretical and practical understanding of the associated protocols, 
topologies and technologies.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe ISO and Internet protocols.  
• Evaluate ISO and Internet protocols against each other.  
• Use protocol specifications to establish the design and functioning of protocols not discussed 
in the lectures.  
• Apply principles of network protocol design  
• Explain how data, voice and video signals are transmitted over a computer network.  
• Describe components of computer networks.  
• Analyse various types of computer network topologies.  
• Develop object -oriented Java programs to transmit messages between workstations on a 
computer network  
 
 
SC.5.8.5  COMPUTER SCIENCE LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module CSC02D2  Introduction to Artificial Intelligence  
NQF Level  6 
Credits  20 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Computer Science 2A (CSC02A2)  and a minimum pass mark of 65% for 
CSC01B1 to continue with CSC02D2 (B2I04Q – AI) (Student s will be 
changed to B2I02Q degree if  pre-requisite was not met).   
   
122 Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integrated part of the BSc 
(Computer Science) with AI specialisation programme is to provide a 
solid foundation for the skills required in Artificial Intelligence as a key 
enabler of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The module introduces 
agent -oriented and multi -agent systems development both as a 
mechanism for concurrency control and as a framework for the 
development of intelligent systems. Furthermore, the student is 
introduced to selected approaches covering a variety of learning 
systems.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event students should be able to:  
• Distinguish between agent -oriented and conventional paradigms  
• Explain agent -oriented principles  
• Apply agent -oriented and multi -agent principles during software development  
• Distinguish between a selection of artificial intelligence learning problems  
• Explain selected approaches for intelligent systems development  
• Develop intelligent systems using selected approaches  
 
 
SC.5. 8.6 COMPUTER SCIENCE   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CSC03A3   Advanced data structures and algorithms  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   Computer Science 2A ( CSC02A2 ) and Computer Science 2B  
 (CSC02B2 ) (or CSC02D2 (for B2I04Q – AI)) 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module , as an integral part of the BSc  
Information Technology program, is to provide the student in IT with 
advanced data structure knowledge.  After completing this module the 
student should be able to explain the meaning of data structures and 
data structure algorithms and to develop data str ucture programs in an 
object -oriented language such as Java or C++ and to do a critical 
evaluation of these programs.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain in detail the theoretical aspects of data structures.  
• Develop short programs in an object oriented language that applies these data structures.  
• The implementation of a practical project, of an appropriate scope, that demonstrates the 
student’s proficiency with Abstract Data Structures.  
• Comment on the efficiency of the different data structures in a range of applications.  
• Estimate the performance of algorithms with respect to execution times and memory usage.  
 
 
SC.5. 8.7 COMPUTER SCIENCE   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CSC03B3   Computer system architectures  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Computer Science 2A ( CSC02A2 ) and  Computer Science 2B  
(CSC02B2 ) 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
Information Technology program is to provide IT professionals with 
knowledge of system software and related hardware. After completion 
the student will have the knowledge to evaluate the design of compu ter 
hardware and system software. The student will also obtain practical 
experience in the design of programs to illustrate applicable aspects of 
system software.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the functioning of the hardware of a computer system such as the central processor, 
memory, and other components of the execution cycle correctly.   
   
123 • Explain important aspects of system software such as operating systems, compilers and 
interpreters accurately.  
• Evaluate the design of system software, and system software components logically.  
• Develop short programs in a suitable language that illustrate important aspects of a computer 
system.  
 
 
SC.5.8.8  COMPUTER SCIENCE   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CSC03D3  Artificial Intelligence Techniques  
NQF Level  7 
Credits  30 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Computer Science 3A (CSC03A3) and Computer Science Introduction 
to Artificial Intelligence (CSC02D2)  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integrated part of the BSc 
(Computer Science) with AI specialisation programme is to provide the 
further advanced skills required in Artificial Intelligence as a key 
enabler of the fourth industrial revolution. Thes e skills depend on data 
structures covered in Computer Science 3A. These artificial 
intelligence techniques are explored in the context of problem domains 
such as Big Data, Computer Vision, and Robotics.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event students should be able to:  
• Discuss Advanced Artificial Intelligence Techniques such as selected approaches from 
Biologically Inspired Artificial Intelligence, Pattern Recognition, and Dimensionality Reduction  
• Distinguish between AI related problem domains as appropriate in contrast to conventional 
software development  
• Address issues of scalability in general and within the context of the selected problem domain .  
• Apply selected Advanced Artificial Intelligence Techniques in the development of software 
systems within the selected problem domain  
 
 
SC.5.8.9  COMPUTER SCIENCE   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module CSC03P3  AI Project  
NQF Level  7 
Credits  34 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Machine Learning module (offered by Faculty of Engineering and the 
Built Environment)  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integrated part of the BSc 
(Computer Science) with AI specialisation programme is to serve as a 
capstone individual project in the field of either Artificial Intelligence or 
Machine Learning. Projects will be superv ised by either the Academy 
of Computer Science or the Faculty of Engineering and the Built 
Environment according to the specifics of each project.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event students should be able to:  
• Identify a project in an appropriate Artificial Intelligence or Machine Learning Problem 
domain.  
• Extract the functional and non -functional requirements for such a project  
• Research any additional techniques and technologies required to address the identified 
problem  
• Implement a solution to the identified problem creating (as opposed to merely utilising) 
appropriate software and hardware components as agreed upon by the project 
supervisor.  
 
 
 
 
  
   
124  
SC.5. 9  ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT                      ENM  
 
Assessment criteria  
A student needs a semester mark of 40% (theory and practical) to gain entrance to the final 
assessment opportunity. A subminimum of 50% is required for practical s to gain entrance to the 
final assessment opportunity. The semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student 
needs a final mark of 50% to pass a module.  The semester mark also contributes to the result of a 
supplementary assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is capped on 50%.  
 
Practicals  
The practical component of this course contributes 20% to the semester mark and is based on 
practical application of concepts discussed in the Theory lectures. These activities range from 
Field trips to completion of relevant online certificates to enhance  the students understanding of 
Environmental problems.  
 
 
SC.5. 9.1 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT   LEVEL 6 (Second year)  
 
Module ENM02A2   Environmental Management 2A  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester  1 
Prerequisites   GGR1EB1  and GGR2EA1  or GR01A1  and GGR01B1  
Purpose  This module examines environmental problems and sustainable 
development.  During the module students develop an understanding of 
the physical environment and ecosystems, and a detailed knowledge 
of the major environmental problems and their impacts.  It also 
examines how sustainable development can assist in managing the 
environment in a sustainable way. In particular the course focusses on 
environmental problems associated with the earth’s atmosphere, 
biodiversity and human activities such as agriculture and mining. It is 
vital that students are aware of the environmental problems that exist 
and ways to manage reduce and mitigate it.  The practicals proposed 
for the course  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Examine and explain the causes of the present -day environmental crisis.  
• Define and explain essential terminology related to sustainability and environmental 
management.  
• Explain how ecosystems have a structure and functions according to certain basic 
environmental laws.  
• Critically assess the meaning and principles of sustainable development.  
• Discuss and explain how environmental degradation is caused by both natural and 
anthropogenically -induced factors.  
• Examine and explain environmental problems in the context of different types of land use.  
• Discuss the meaning and principles of sustainable development.  
• Explain the causes, impacts and strategies to ameliorate global climate change.  
• Account for the loss of biodiversity on a global scale, as well as within South Africa and examine 
various solutions to this environmental issue.  
• Explain the environmental impacts of different types of mining and discuss ways to manage 
these more appropriately.  
• Explain the impacts of agriculture on the environment, both in general and in South Africa more 
specifically.   
• Apply specific research methods to environmental data and to the local environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
125  
SC.5. 9.2 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT   LEVEL 7 (Third year)  
 
Module ENM03A3   Environmental Management 3A  
NQF Level     7 
Credits      30 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   ENM02A2  and GGR02B2  
Purpose  The law and administration module allows students to develop an 
understanding of the Environmental legislation in South Africa and the 
application thereof. Students are taught the history and background of 
the different laws applicable to Environmental Man agement Globally, 
and are trained on how to apply the laws through exploring relevant 
and applicable case studies.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able  to: 
• Explain the role played by economics in environmental management.  
• Identify and explain suitable economic instruments for environmental management.  
• Have an understanding of ethics as pertaining to the environment, and using many case 
studies, assess how ethical projects are for people and the environment.  
• Debate environmental issues regarding the impact of the environment, economics and 
humans.  
• Describe the manner in which  statutory environmental law has evolved in South Africa with 
specific reference to the post -apartheid period.  
• Assess the role played by international and regional environmental law in shaping South 
African environmental law.  
• Differentiate between compliance and enforcement  
• Critically assess the effectiveness and implementation of South African environmental law, with 
specific reference to the Constitution, and other relevant framework laws.  
• Participate in practical sessions, which may comprise of various site visits, case studies, 
physical activities, data collection and processing, attending public participation events and the 
like.  
 
 
SC.5.9 .3 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT   LEVEL 7 (Third year)  
 
Module ENM03B3   Environmental Management 3B  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   ENM02A2  and ENM03A3  
Purpose  This module examines environmental ethics and law and their 
relationship to environmental management. It is a core module. 
Students are expected to understand the perspectives, factors and 
elements embedded in human social systems that then influence 
envir onmental economics, environmental management and the use of 
natural resources. This enables critical understanding of how 
environmental problems develop, how humans impact on the natural 
environmental and how natural resources are degraded. The evolution 
of environmental law, as well as the challenges surrounding its 
implementation and administration will then be clarified. The challenges 
of managing compliance and enforcing adherence to the law will be 
articulated, primarily through case studies. This modu le aims to 
capacitate students of environmental management for work in the field 
of environmental management.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Identify why environmental resource management is an ethical and moral issue.  
• Define and interpret key concepts associated with environmental assessment, monitoring, 
mitigation and rehabilitation and to know and apply the logical sequence to be followed when 
undertaking a successful environmental management programme.  
• Describe Integrated Environmental Management (IEM) in South Africa.   
   
126 • Demonstrate how Environmental Management in South Africa is determined by environmental 
policy and associated environmental legislation.  
• Discuss the environmental decision making process in terms of an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) (as well as other related tools) in South Africa, and  through the use of case 
studies.  
• Provide a brief overview of the principles and methods of Social Impact Assessment (SIA) in 
South Africa.  
• Explain why, how and when environmental monitoring, mitigation and rehabilitation should take 
place, through the use of case studies.   
• Describe different processes involved in Specialist Studies within an EIA (eg: Air quality 
monitoring, Soil assessment, Water quality assessment, Health impact assessment, Heritage 
assessment and Climate Risk analysis)  
 
 
 
 
SC.5. 10 GEOGRAPHY                                                                                                GGR  
 
Assessment  
A student needs a semester mark of 40% in theory and 50% in practical to gain entrance to the 
final assessment opportunity. The semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student 
needs a final mark of 50% to pass a module. The semester mark also contributes to the result of a 
supplementary assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is capped at 50%.  
 
Excursions  
The official Geography excursion during the spring recess forms an integral part of third -year 
modules and is compulsory for all third -year students.  
 
Practical work  
All undergraduate programmes have a 1 x 3 -hour practical s ession per week. An average of 5 0% 
is required for practical work, to obtain admission to a particular semester examination.  Candidates 
repeating a module must apply to be exempted from practicals if a mark of more than 50% was 
obtained during the previous registration.  
 
 
SC.5. 10.1 GEOGRAPHY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   GGR1EB1    Geography 1A1E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Purpose  To develop the students’ understanding of Human Geography by 
investigating  population and cultural geography.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Explain and evaluate Geography as a science.  
• Discuss and explain the basic terms, concepts, facts, principles, rules and theories of 
population.  
• Formulate approprioate  responses to critical or problematic issues in these field of Human 
Geography.  
• Employ appropriate cartographic methods to display geographic and statistical information 
visually, using maps, diagrams and graphs (bar, line, pie, proportion and scatter).  
• Interpret and infer meaning from maps, diagrams and graphs and employ appropriate methods 
to manipulate data and graphs to interpret and infer meaning . 
• Construct a logical, coherent argumentative academic essay, which follows the rules and 
standards of geographical academic discourse, and displays evidence of comprehension, 
analysis and synthesis . 
 
 
 
 
  
   
127 SC.5. 10.2 GEOGRAPHY  LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  GGR2EA1    Geography 1A2E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisite   GGR1EB1  
Purpose  To develop the students’ understanding of Human Geography by 
investigating  political, economic, development and settlement 
geography.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Discuss and explain  the basic terms, concepts, facts, principles, rules and theories of political, 
economic, development and settlement geography .  
• Formulate appropriate responses to critical or problematic issues in these fields  of Human 
Geopgraphy . 
• Construct a logical, coherent argumentative academic essay, which follows the rules and 
standards of geographical academic discourse, and displays evidence of comprehension, 
analysis and synthesis.  
• Conduct research and write a research report following the rules, standards and conventions 
of scientific report writing in the subject of Geography . 
 
 
SC.5. 10.3 GEOGRAPHY    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  GGR01A1    Introduction to Human Geography  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Purpose  To develop the students’ understanding of Human Geography 
(Population dynamics, development of rural and urban settlements, 
urbanisation, agriculture and the provision of food, rural land use, 
sources of energy and economic impacts).  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Describe the basic phenomena and theories concerning population, rural and urban 
settlements, as well as rural and economic activities;  
• Solve problems and gather and analyse data with regard to the topics mentioned above.  
• Interpret  topographic  maps  and orthophotos , diagrams and graphs.  
• Plan, construct and present a well drafted and edited essay that demonstrates academic 
literacy and referencing.  
• Describe the basic terms, concepts, facts, principles, rules and theories of population studies, 
cultural studies, human settlements and  economic activities and formulate appropriate 
responses to critical or problematic issues (both familiar and new) in t hese fields.  
• Critically engage with the evolution of theoretical ideas within the fields of population studies, 
human settlements and economic activities.  
• Employ appropriate cartographic methods to display geographic information.  
• Interpret and infer meaning from maps, diagrams and graphs.  
• Construct a logical, coherent argumentative academic essay, which follows the rules and 
standards of geographical academic discourse, and displays evidence of comprehension, 
analysis and synthesis.  
• Articulate the norms and standards of professional and ethical conduct within the field of 
geography.  
 
 
SC.5. 10.4 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  GGR01B1   Climatology and Geomorphology  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2   
   
128 Prerequisite   GGR1EB1  and GGR2EA1  or GGR01A1  
Purpose  This module is a key module for Geography. It examines the basic 
concepts and principles in climatology and geomorphology in order to 
understand the physical processes that produce weather and climate, 
and shape the Earth.  Students need a clear understanding of 
climatology and geomorphology as it determines and influences the 
human and natural environment. It is vital that the students are aware 
of the complex relationship between man and the physical 
environment, as it influences human activities and visa -versa.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
Climatology:  
• Define and explain the composition and structure of the atmosphere and adiabatic processes.  
• Apply adiabatic processes in order to explain cloud formation and associated precipitation.  
• Apply adiabatic processes in order to explain atmospheric heat transfer.  
• Apply adiabatic processes in order to explain horizontal and vertical air motion and winds.  
• Apply adiabatic processes in order to explain cumulus convection.  
 
Geomorphology:  
• Define and explain tectonic and orogenic processes and gravitational, fluvial, coastal and 
aeolian erosional and depositional processes.  
• Elaborate on possible future Ice Ages and Global Warming, and the implication thereof for 
utilisation of the land.  
 
Practicals: Topographic maps and Orthophoto Maps  
• Read and analyse Topographic maps and Orthophoto maps  
• Work out the gradient of slopes, area of different features on the maps.  
• Determine the exact location on the maps as well as direction from one feature to another.  
• Interpret relationships between features on the map.  
 
SC.5. 10.5 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  GGR02A2   Pedology  and Biogeography  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   GGR1EB1  and GGR2EA1  or GGR01A1 and GGR01B1  
Purpose  To develop the students ’ understanding of Soil and Plant  geography 
and how these sub -disciplines relate to each other and to humans’  
activities on Earth. Pedology  studies soil forming factors, physical and 
chemical soil formation processes, soil types and classifications, the 
worldwide distribution of soil (and in South Africa) as well as soil 
management principles, including applications of soil science theory to 
improve agricultural soil. Biogeography instructs the student in the 
distribution pattern of plants and animals on the surface of the earth, 
time-space variability patterns and the processes  that produ ce these 
patterns, as well as the structure and functioning of ecosystems.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Define and explain soil forming factors and physical and chemical soil -forming processes.  
• Identify and scientifically describe soil textural and structural types and soil colour.  
• Elaborate on soil types found in South Africa.  
• Explain how a plant system functions and describe the structure and functioning of an 
ecosystem.  
• Explain the main differences that exist between terrestrial and marine ecosystems.  
• Discuss and know the main biome types of South Africa as well as their main characteristics.  
• Explain the influence and impact of humans on the various ecosystems and the necessity for 
the conservation thereof.  
 
 
 
 
  
   
129  
SC.5. 10.6 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   GGR02B2   Economic and Population Geography  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   GGR02A2  
Purpose  To develop the students’ understanding of Economic and Population 
Geography and how these two sub -disciplines impact on each other 
and man’s  activities on planet earth.  
Economic Geography  explains and study the spatial organisation of 
humanity’s economic activities and how the globalisation process 
influences location considerations of human activities, especially that of 
agriculture and industries.  
Population Geography  develops the students understanding of the 
uneven population distributions and densities, as well as differential 
population trends by means of a spatial study of human population; to 
show how this information will lead to a better insight into their spat ial 
impacts on and change of the natural and cultural environments.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Demonstrate a detailed knowledge of the differences, numbers and distribution patterns of the 
world’s population as well as how mortality, fertility and migration will change it.  
• Understand the impact of economic activities on the world’s population as well as the 
environment and natural resources.  
• Understand the historical development of economic processes and population changes.  
• Able to do basic statistics to depict and analyse population and economic data.  and statistical 
information visually, using maps, diagrams and graphs (bar, line, pie, proportion and scatter).  
• Employ appropriate statistical methods to manipulate statistical data and graphs in order to 
interpret and infer meaning.  
• Work as a member of a team to successfully complete tasks in the practicals.  
• Draft and edit an essay that demonstrates academic literacy and referencing.  
 
 
SC.5. 10.7 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   GGR03A3   Geo-Informatics  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   GGR02A2  and GGR02B2  
Purpose  This module develops students understanding of the concepts, basic 
principles and components of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
as a tool for spatial analyses. GIS is a useful tool and information 
system to store, retrieve at will, transform and displ ay spatial data from 
the real world for  a particular set of purposes.  It is vital that students are 
aware of various methodologies that can be used to analyse and solve 
human and environmental problems.  During the course of the module  
they will also develop their ability to use GIS as a tool for spatial 
analyses.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Define Geographic Information Systems.  
• Explain, discuss  and describe the basic concepts, principles and components of GIS.  
• Demonstrate their understanding of the basic concepts, principles and components of GIS and 
apply them to relevant GIS software.  
• Apply GIS as a spatial problem -solving tool.  
• Generate GIS products.  
 
 
 
  
   
130  
SC.5. 10.8 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  GGR03B3   Urban Geography and the S.A. City  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   GGR03A3  
Purpose  To outline the origins of urban life and explore the relationship 
between colonization and globalisation that characterizes the 
emergence of different urban forms around the world. Analyse how 
contemporary cities can be interpreted as economic and social 
spaces. Case studies from the global South and Africa in particular 
will be drawn on to illustrate this urban narrative. The South African 
city will focus on the origins of segregation and Apartheid planning 
and control, decentralization and the post -Aparth eid era. A range of 
topics related to contemporary Johannesburg such as urban 
renewal initiatives, urban tourism and development issues are also 
interrogated.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to: 
• The ability to examine the key contemporary social, economic and political debates within 
urban geography.  
• To understand the relationship of historical, economic, political and social processes shaping  
contemporary urban life.  
• Analyse a range of different patterns of urbanisation in the world.  
• Understand the roots of segregation the ethos behind Apartheid city planning and how it has 
impacted and shaped the socio -economic development of South African cities.  
• Understand the various factors that led to the decentralization of Johannesburg.  
• Ability to analyse, discuss and contextualize urban issues in contemporary Johannesburg  
 
 
SC.5.1 1 GEOLOGY                                                                                         GLG  
 
The Department of Geology presents undergraduate and postgraduate (Honours, Masters and Doctoral) 
programme s in Geology and supporting modules. Students require at least an Honours Degree in 
Geology to be able to register as a professional geologist.  The programme as a whole is designed such 
that the qualified geologist or earth scientist would be able to choos e from a large variety of career 
possibilities.   
 
Undergraduate and Honours programme s are subdivided into the following modules:  
 
The undergraduate programme in Geology (with supporting modules) is presented in the form of 
independent semester modules . 
 
Modules are grouped into core modules , which we consider essential for students who would like to 
become professional geologists and require an Honours Degree in Geology, and supporting designed 
specifically to enhance the earth science degree programme.  
 
In addition to the above, the Department of Geology offers special 1 to 2 week -long practical field 
modules  in techniques of geological field observation, data acquisition and mapping. These field 
modules are compulsory for undergraduate students who intend to major in Geology, in addition to the 
six core modules of Geology 1, 2 and 3, and for all students regi stered for the Geology Honours 
programme.  
 
All theoretical modules are designed so as to train Geology and Earth Science students in a global 
context.  Modules are all subdivided into three components,  
1. An introduction to the subject terminology and the most important processes of earth dynamics and 
rock formation ; 
2. Modelling of earth and geological phenomena.  
3. The application of models and observations towards development and management of geological 
resources and the environment.  
  
   
131 Ad hoc compulsory weekend and one -day field excursions form part of some of the theoretical 
core modules. These excursions carry extra costs not covered by the module fee.  
 
Geology Department Practicals  
 
Tests, tutorials and practicals  are compulsory and count towards the semester mark. If an assessment 
opportunity is missed due to illness, an original medical certificate for a valid medical condition plus the 
Application for Deferred Test/Final assessment MUST be completed by a reputable general practitioner 
and must be handed in not later than 5 days after the missed practical or test. Failure to do so will result 
in a mark of zero being allocated. A sub -minimum of 40% for practical assessm ents is required for 
admission to the exams in  all Geology Department modules. A student will only be allowed to miss one 
practical per module with valid documentation as set out above. If more than one practical is missed, 
the student will get a “Practical Incomplete” grading and will not be allowed entrance to the examination.  
 
There is no uniform , departmental policy for the way in which each geology module semester mark is 
calculated as each lecturer has different weightings for practical test s, reports and theory assessments 
used to finalize the semester mark . 
 
GLG01A1  
Final mark weighting  = Semester mark  : Exam mark  
                                  =         50              :       50 
 
The semester mark is compiled as follows:  
Practical 40%  
Theory 60%  
 
GLG01B1  
Final mark weighting  = Semester mark  : Exam mark  
                                   =         50              :       50 
 
GLG22A2  
Final mark weighting  = Semester mark  : Exam mark  
                             =         50             :       50 
 
Semester mark compiled as follows:  
Written theory assessments  60%  
Practical assessments   40%      
 
GLG02B2  
Final mark weighting  = Semester mark  : Exam mark  
                                =         50             :       50 
 
Semester mark compiled as follows:  
Written theory assessments  50% 
Practical assessments   50% 
 
GLG10A3  and GLG20A3  
Final mark weighting  = Semester mark  : Exam mark  
                                =         50              :       50 
 
Semester mark compiled as follows:  
Assessments in practical studies (labo ratory)  20% 
2 written theory semester t ests                          60% 
1 week -end excursion report  20% 
 
Note: In the event that the week -end field excursion does not take place, the semester mark is then 
weighted as 30% practicals and 70% theory.  
 
GLG03B3  
Final mark weighting  = Semester mark  : Exam mark  
                                  =         50            :       50 
 
Credit for Repeat Students   
   
132 If a student fails a module, but passes the practical component, they will only be allowed to retain credit 
for the practicals, and hence not repeat the m, if their average for the entire semester’s practicals is at 
least 65% . 
 
SC.5.1 1.1 GEOLOGY    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module GLG01A1   Minerals, Rocks and Earth Dynamics  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Purpose  The main purpose is to familiarise the students with general geological 
concepts and principals as these are not taught at high schools.  The 
purpose of the module is to ensure that the student obtains an overall 
understanding of the earth and how it functions. Special attention is given 
to the nature, composition and classification of materials constituting earth 
and the importance of time in earth processes . This module is considered 
essential for all subsequent modules in Geology and also for students in 
Environme ntal and other Earth Sciences. It is also a required module for 
students in Civil Engineering.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate a knowledge of and ability to identify common minerals and rocks.  
• Demonstrate a proficiency of the basic processes affecting the earth and how they are inter -related 
through the paradigm of plate tectonics.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of geological time and both the changes (including evolution of life 
forms) that have occurred over the 4.5 billion years of the existence of the earth and its future fate.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of basic concepts about the formation of various types of mineral 
deposits and natural organic carbon fuel resources.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the general geological structure and stratigraphy of southern 
Africa.  
• Demonstrate an appreciation of the importance of geological parameters in applied science like civil 
engineering and environmental sciences.  
 
 
SC.5.1 1.2 GEOLOGY    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module GLG00A1   Geology 1 Field Techniques  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     3 
Presentation   1 week, usually offered during the first week of the winter break.  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1  
Purpose  This purpose of this module is vital in the programme because it provides 
students the opportunity to undertake field work, make field observations 
and visit working mines. None of these learning outcomes are possible in 
the lecture room or during practical sessions held on campus.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify and describe rocks in the field.  
• Appreciate the value of field work.  
• Classify the rocks observed into their lithostratigraphic groupings.  
• Make geological observations and record them in a coherent way in their field note book.  
• Use geological field equipment.  
• Make notes about the relationship between geological features and the environment.  
 
SC.5.1 1.3 GEOLOGY    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module GLG01B1   Optical and Analytical Mineralogy  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1   
   
133 Purpose  Mineral science is the fundamental building block of the geosciences, and 
a good understanding of the physical and chemical structure of minerals 
is therefore indispensable. The purpose of this module as part of the BSc 
qualification is to enable students to understand the fundamentals of 
crystallography, and the physical and optical p roperties of minerals.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Predict chemical and structural properties of minerals based on crystal chemistry.  
• Evaluate minerals using crystallographic principles.  
• Analyse  common minerals with a fundamental understanding of systematic mineralogy.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the optical properties of transparent minerals.  
• Use the correct terminology in describing the optical properties of a mineral.  
• Use the petrographic microscope for the identification of the optical properties of minerals.  
 
 
SC.5.1 1.4 GEOLOGY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module GLG22A2   Sedimentology and Stratigraphy  
NQF Level     6 
Credits    16 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1 and GLG01B1  
Purpose  The purpose of the module is to enable students to appreciate the 
importance of sedimentary rocks in geology and in the role of 
understanding the origin and formation of sedimentary rocks in unravelling 
the origin and evolution of the Earth.  At the end of the module students 
will be able to identify and describe sedimentary rocks and interpret the 
sedimentary environments in which they form.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental components of clastic, chemical and 
biogenic sedimentary rocks and classify as well identify their origins  
• Identify and contrast the various bedforms and primary and secondary sedimentary structures 
associated with sedimentary rocks and understand their formation  
• Understand the processes by which rocks weather physically and chemically  
• Describe and interpret the composition of clastic and chemical sediments  
• Examine ancient sedimentary rock sequences in the field, measure sedimentary profiles in the 
field, examine and record various aspects of sedimentary rocks (grain size, sedimentary 
structures) in the field.  
• Understand the basic principles of facies analysis and how facies analysis is used to identify 
and interpret modern and ancient sedimentary environments  
• Understand the origin and evolution of some sedimentary deposits of southern Africa and its 
mineral deposits.  
 
SC.5.1 1.5 GEOLOGY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module GLG00A2   Geology 2 Field Techniques  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     4 
Presentation   1 week, usually offered during the first week of the winter break  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1  and GLG01B1  
Purpose  To familiarise students with geological field work. The students will learn 
how make, evaluate, interpret geological observations, and how to indicate 
geological observations on a geological map.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Observe different geological features.  
• Evaluate and interpret geological observations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
134 SC.5.11.6  GEOLOGY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module GLG02B2   Structural Geology and Plate Tectonics  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1, GLG01A2 and GLG02A2  
Purpose  Due to its dynamic basis Structural Geology forms an integral part of most 
other sub disciplines in Geology such as Sedimentary basin analyses etc. 
It is therefore of cardinal importance that all geology students be well 
educated in this subject. The main purpose of the module is therefore to 
enable students to comprehend the link between structural geological 
processes and Plate Tectonics.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Comprehend the mutual relationship between stress, strain and rheological behaviour of 
deformed rocks  
• Identify the characteristic features in fault rock that relate to brittle and ductile rock behaviour 
formations.  
• Make and interpret structural measurements using geological maps and stereographic 
projections  
• Understand the mutual relationship between deformation, metamorphism and time in the 
evolution of deformed terrains  
• Understand the relationship between geodynamic processes and the evolution of modern day 
plate boundaries.  
 
SC.5.1 1.7 GEOLOGY   LEVEL 6 (Third  Year)  
 
Module GLG10A3  Igneous Rocks  
NQF Level  7 
Credits  12.5 
Presentation  Semester 1 (First Quarter)  
Prerequisites  GLG01A1, GLG01B1 and GLG22A2, GLG02B2  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
qualification is to provide the students with a focused education on the 
fundamental concepts of igneous rocks. Students will develop theoretical 
and practical knowledge in identifying igneo us rocks that will serve as a 
fundamental basis for their further development in geology.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Recognize, categorize  and interpret the origin of the most common types of igneous rocks.  
• Use the petrographic microscope to the study of igneous rocks.  
• Use geochemistry to the study of igneous rocks.  
• Identify the origin and evolution of South Africa’s igneous rocks.  
• Identify the significance of igneous rocks in a plate tectonic context.  
 
 
SC.5.11.8  GEOLOGY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Modul e GLG20A3  Metamorphic Rocks  
NQF Level  7 
Credits  12.5 
Presentation  Semester 1 (Second Quarter)  
Prerequisites  GLG01A1, GLG01B1 and GLG22A2, GLG02B2  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
qualification is to provide the students with a focused education on the 
fundamental concepts of metamorphic rocks. Students will develop 
theoretical and practical knowledge in identifying m etamorphic rocks 
that will serve as a fundamental basis for their further development in 
geology.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Recognize, categorize and interpret the origin of the most common types of metamorphic 
rocks.   
   
135 • Use the petrographic microscope to the study of metamorphic rocks.  
• Use pressure -temperature to understand the formation conditions of metamorphic rocks  
• Identify the origin and evolution of South Africa’s metamorphic rocks.  
• Identify the significance of metamorphic rocks in the global -plate tectonic context.  
 
 
SC.5.1 1.9 GEOLOGY    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module GLG00A3   Geology 3 Field Mapping  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     5 
Presentation   Ten (10) days usually offered during the last week of the winter break  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1  and GLG02B2  
Purpose  To expose students to field mapping  techniques. In this module the student 
will learn how to practically integrate sedimentary, structural, igneous and 
metamorphic geological principles.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Use the geological compass for geological measurements.  
• Map geological phenomena on various scales.  
• Produce a geological map, including cross sections and a stratigraphic column.  
• Write a concise report on the results.  
 
 
SC.5.1 1.10 GEOLOGY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module GLG03B3   Historic al and Economic  Geology 3B 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   GLG01A1  and GLG 22A2  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module is to make students aware of the 
geological evolution of Earth and of petrological processes that may lead 
to the formation of economic mineral deposits. Special emphasis is given 
to examples from southern Africa. Student s will learn how to describe the 
lithostratigraphy, biostratigraphy and event stratigraphy from the 
Archaean to the Cenozoic and to understand the changes that have 
occurred throughout the ca. 4.55 billion years of Earth History. Students 
will also learn h ow important mineral deposits formed through time, 
providing them with the necessary skills to explore for mineral resources 
(metal commodities, gem stones such as diamond, industrial minerals and 
rocks) and evaluate those for mining feasibility.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Appreciate the origin and evolution of the Earth and the concept of plate tectonics through time.  
• Understand evolutionary changes in life forms over time.  
• Understand the occurrences and major changes in Earth processes, such as ice ages, origin 
of life, and origin of oxygen in the atmosphere.  
• Recognise and understand the major lithostratigraphic sequences in southern Africa.  
• Understand the dynamics (event stratigraphy) of how the sedimentary, igneous and 
metamorphic rock sequences originated and changed during 3.5 billion years of Earth History  
as preserved in southern Africa  . 
• Recognize important ore minerals and interpret their textures both in hand sample s / drillcores  
and by using the petrographic microscope with reflected light.  
• Understand the primary processes of ore formation.  
• Understand the theory of the principle types of geochemical surveys.  
• Understand and apply the primary data -handling techniques of ore body evaluation.  
• Understand the economic aspects of South Africa’s economic deposits  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
136 SC.5.1 1.11 GEOLOGY   LEVEL 6 (First Year)  
 
Module   APG02A2   Applied Geological Maps and Geospatial Techniques  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   GLG01A1  and GLG01B1  
Purpose  A good understanding of geological maps and geospatial techniques is 
indispensable in the geosciences. To be able to create and understand 
geological maps knowledge of navigation techniques as well as the use of 
a geological compass is indispensable. The purpose of this module as part 
of the BSc qualification is to enable students to create, read, understand, 
and interpret geological maps and geospatial data  and to effectively use a 
geological compass to gather data that needs to be presented on a 
geological map.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand the function of a geological compass and how to use if effectively.  
• Use the correct terminology in describing the geological structure indicated on a geological 
map.  
• To interpret geological maps in terms of stratigraphy and structural geology.  
• Create a geological map from limited information given.  
• Understand basic navigational techniques  
• Explain the fundamental theory and applications of coordinate reference systems, map 
projections, and the global positioning system (GPS).  
• Formulate geological applications of geographic information systems (GIS) using technical 
methods.  
• Formulate geological applications of remote sensing (RS) using technical methods.  
 
 
SC.5.1 1.12 GEOLOGY   LEVEL 6 (First Year)  
 
Module   APG02B2   Applied Engineering and Environmental Geology  
NQF Level     6 
Credits   20 
Presentation   Semester 2 
Prerequisites   GLG01A1  is highly recommended  
Purpose  The purpose of the module is to show the relationship between geology, 
environmental issues and engineering concepts of rocks. This module 
compliments the core geology modules because it examines the applied 
aspects of geology, not only the classic, theore tical aspects.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate an understanding of how the South African geology is an integral part of 
environmental studies.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the fundamentals of aquatic chemistry.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the environmental implications of mining activities.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of lithological variation in rock sequences and how variation in 
rheological properties under varying physical conditions can influence the stability of target 
areas.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of basic geological structures and how these influence 
engineering aspects of the rocks.  
• Give a basic evaluation of engineering sites based on geological observations made  
• Gain an understanding of the stratigraphy of South Africa.  
• Give examples of different kinds of weathering in rocks . 
• Demonstrate an understanding of the positive and negative engineering aspects of common 
rocks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
137  
SC.5.1 2 INFORMATICS                                                                                                  IFM 
 
Lectures, Tutorials, Practicals and Assessment Criteria  
 
1. Tests, tutorials  and practical classes are compulsory and count towards the semester mark.   If an 
assessment opportunity of whatever kind is missed due to illness or death of immediate family, 
an original medical certificate with a valid medical condition  or other applicable certificate plus the 
Application for Deferred test/final assessment (in the Appendix section of this guide) MUST  be 
completed by a reputable general practitioner or a death certificate must be handed in not later 
than 7 days  after the missed practical or test.   Failure to do so will result in a mark of zero being 
allocated.  
 
2. Practical classes form an integral part of the module and NO student will be excused from practical 
classes. Absence from a practical session must be motivated by a doctor’s certificate with a valid 
medical condition (see above). The procedure pertaining to absence from practical sessions will 
be detailed in each m odule’s study guide respectively.  
 
3. With the exception of Informatics 3B NO exemption from practical classes is applicable for modules 
that are repeated. A student repeating Informatics 3B will only be given exemption for the practical 
component of that module if a pass percentage was obtained for the group project in the previou s 
year. If a pass percentage was not obtained in the group project the student will be required to 
complete a mini -project.  
 
4. In the determination of the module semester mark the mark attained in the theoretical assessment 
and the practical mark is taken into account.  This weighting is provided in the study guide of each 
module.  
 
5. A sub -minimum of 50% for practicals is required for admission to semester examinations in 
Informatics and Computer Science.  
 
6. A student needs a semester mark of 40% to gain entrance to the final assessment opportunity. 
The semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student needs a final mark of 50% 
to pass a module. The semester mark also contributes to the result of a supplementary 
assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is cap ped on 50%.  
 
7. For the modules Informatics 100 (IFM100)  and Informatics 1A (IFM01A1, IFM1A10)  - Students 
who obtain a semester mark of 70% or higher will be exempt ed from writing the final assessment 
(examination)  (applicable as  from 2018) .  
 
 
SC.5.1 2.1 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  IFM100   Informatics 100  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites  o Matriculation endorsement certificate  
o Grade 12 Mathematics with a minimum of a 5  
o Minimum APS: 35 points  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module is to provide Accountancy 
professionals with basic knowledge of the analysis, design and 
development of algorithms into programs demonstrating 
correctness using a visual computer language such as Visual Basic  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Solve programming problems using a computer.  
• Analyse, design and program algorithms.  
• Use control structures in algorithms and computer programs.  
• Demonstrate the use of arrays and records in computer programs.  
• Demonstrate computer programs.  
 
  
   
138 SC.5.1 2.2 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  IFM01A1   Introduction to algorithm development (VB)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  Informatics 1A  requires that students wishing to register for the module 
obtain the following:  
o Matriculation endorsement certificate  
o If Mathematics 1 is included in the qualification, the minimum APS of 
6 for Mathematics is required .  
o If Mathematics 1 is not included the minimum APS of 4 for 
Mathematics  is required . 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
Information Technology programme is to provide Information 
Technology professionals who can analyse, design and develop 
algorithms into programs demonstrating correctness using a visual 
comp uter language such as Visual Basic.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Solve programming problems using a computer.  
• Analyse, design and program algorithms.  
• Use control structures in algorithms and computer programs.  
• Demonstrate the use of arrays and records in computer programs.  
• Demonstrate computer programs.  
 
 
SC.5.1 2.3 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  IFM01B1   Introduction to data structures (VB)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Informatics 1A (IFM 01A1 ) 
Purpose  The module aims to enable the student to represent data in the memory 
of a computer, enable the student to develop object -oriented and 
component -based computer programs in a computer language such as 
Visual Basic and to introduce the student to introductory concepts of 
social and professional issues with relevance to Information 
Technology.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe abstract data and internal data types.  
• Explain external data types.  
• Explain and compare the object -oriented programming paradigm and the component approach 
to program development.  
• Describe object -oriented program components and their existing relationships with other 
components.  
• Develop object -oriented programs in a computer language such as Visual Basic to design and 
implement internal and external data types.  
• Explain introductory concepts concerning social and professional issues in Information 
Technology.  
• Discuss select applications in Informatics.  
 
   
   
139  
SC.5.1 2.4 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   IFM02A2   Database Design  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites  Informatics 1A (IFM 01A1) and Informatics 1B (IFM 01B1)  
(For Information Technology (Electrical Engineering):  Computer 
Science 1A ( CSC01A1 ) and  Computer Science 1B ( CSC01B1 )). 
Purpose  The module prepares the student to develop and implement computer 
systems for the  solution of business problems.  To obtain, on a practical 
level, experience as an individual; to identify, analyse and implement a 
complete database system.  The Database design module aims to 
facilitate the development of competent database developers for the 
ever-growing IT industry.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Discuss and use database concepts.  
• Discuss and implement design concepts.  
• Discuss and implement advanced design and Implementation concepts.  
• Discuss and implement new developments.  
 
 
SC.5.1 2.5 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   IFM02B2  Internet electronic commerce  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Informatics 2A (IFM 02A2) 
Purpose  The module ensures that a student will have knowledge on the 
architecture and functioning of the Internet; will be able to explain how 
the Internet can be used in applications such as the WWW,   
e-commerce and e -mail and explain the role of network security in the 
protection of information and to introduce the student to ethical and 
professional issues with relevance to Information Technology.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe key features of electronic commerce.  
• Evaluate the role of the Internet in applications.  
• Define electronic commerce business models and strategies.  
• Identify appropriate technologies to meet different electronic commerce objectives.  
• Critically evaluate security measures in electronic commerce over the Internet.  
• Explain ethical and professional considerations for Information Technology.  
• Design a simple three -tier client/server system.  
 
   
   
140  
SC.5.1 2.6 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   IFM03A3   Introduction to software engineering  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   Informatics 2A (IFM 02A2) & Informatics 2B (IFM 02B2) 
Purpose  The Software Engineering module specifically aims to facilitate the 
development of competent software developers and engineers for the 
ever-growing IT industry. The purpose of this module in Software 
Engineering is to enable students to develop professiona l skills, 
knowledge and attitudes that are necessary to become highly 
competent as software developers and engineers.  Specifically, 
students develop and implement computer systems for the solution of 
business problems and obtain, on a practical level, expe rience in a 
team relationship; to identify, analyse and implement a prototype of a 
business system.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Explain the accepted theoretical principles of software engineering.  
• Indicate and recognize the steps involved in the development of an IT business system.  
• Develop an object -orientated model for a client/server system for the Internet.  
• Analyse and design a prototype of a business system in a team relationship.  
 
 
SC.5.1 2.7 INFORMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   IFM03B3   Advanced Software Engineering  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Informatics 3A (IFM 03A3) 
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
Information Technology programme is to facilitate the development of 
competent software developers and software engineers for the ever -
growing IT industry. The module prepares the student to develop and 
implement computer systems for the solution of business problems. To 
obtain, on a practical level, experience in a team relationship;  to 
identify, analyse and implement a prototype of a business system.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of the learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Discuss and use Development  concepts.  
• Discuss and implement Verification and Validation  concepts.  
• Discuss and implement Management  concepts.  
• Discuss and use Emerging Technologies.  
• Identify and discuss legal aspects of IT.  
• Comp letion of a practical IT business system in a group project.  
 
 
 
 
SC.5.1 3 MATHEMATICS                                                                                              MAT  
 
MATHEMATICS ALTERNATIVE SEMESTER MODULES - An alternative presentation of first 
and certain second year Mathematics  
 
Alternative Semester Courses are presented by the Department of Mathematics  and Applied 
Mathematics, eg. MAT01A1  is offered in the first semester, while the alternative ASMA1A 1 is 
offered in the subsequent (second) semester. This presentation is intended to provide students 
who had failed the original course, with the opportunity to repeat the same module in the 
following/alternative semester. Students do not have to wait a whol e semester before repeating the 
module. This opportunity is available for the following modules:   
   
141  
MAT01A1 , MAT01B1  (as ASMA1A1, ASMA1B1 respectively)  
MAT01A2 , MAT01B2  (as ASMA2A1 , ASMA2B1 respectively)  
MAT02A2 , MAT02B2  (as AMA2A2 , ASMA2B2 respectively)  
MAT04A2 , MAT04B2  (as ASMA2A4, ASMA2B4 respectively)  (not currently available ) 
 
MATENA1, MATENB1 (as ASME1A1, ASME1B1 respectively) (Engineering)  
MATEAA2, MATEAB2 (as ASME2A2, ASME2B2 respectively) (Engineering)  
MATECA2, MATECB2 (as ASME2A1, ASME2B1 respectively) (Engineering)  
 
MAA00A1 (as ASMAAA1) (CBE)  
 
Entrance Requirements:   Please refer to Part 1  
Pass requirements:  At least 50%  
 
For further information contact the Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics:  
Tel: (011) 559 -2831/2661  (office hours)  
Fax: (011) 559 -2874  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.1 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   MAA00A1   Introductory Mathematical Analysis A  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 4  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to give students a proper foundation in 
important Mathematical skills needed to pursue further studies in 
Accounting, Business, Finance and Economics. Students are taught 
various topics in fundamental Algebra, Graphs, Financial Mathematics, 
Statistics and Calculus with direct applications in the relevant fields.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• define and apply fundamental concepts of algebra;  
• determine and apply fundamental concepts of domains and functions;  
• display relevant skills in the areas of graphs and systems;  
• solve exponential and logarithmic equations;  
• solve elementary financial mathematical problems;  
• solve problems around basic linear programming and linear equations geometrically;  
• discuss and determine various probability and statistical techniques and apply fundamental 
concepts of calculus . 
 
 
SC.5.1 3.2 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MAA00B1   Mathematical Analysis B  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   MAA00A1  (or ASMAAA1)  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to teach students more advanced 
Mathematical skills needed to pursue future studies in Economics and 
Econometrics.  Students are taught many topics in Calculus and Matrix 
Algebra with direct applications in Economics and Econometr ics. 
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• calculate arithmetic and geometric sequences, convert sums into summation notation and 
evaluate sums;  
• apply symmetry to curve -sketching, be familiar with the shapes of the graphs of six basic 
functions and to consider translation, reflection, and vertical stretching or shrinking of the graph 
of a function and to discuss functions of several variables and t o compute function values;  
• define and analyse the fundamentals of matrix algebra;   
   
142 • apply limits and basic continuity;  
• apply differentiation theoretically and practically;  
• graphically display knowledge of curve -sketching; and  
• apply integration  
 
 
SC.5. 13.3 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MATDCA1   Mathematics for Finance and Business 1A  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 3 or  
 Mathematical Literacy Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to give students a proper foundation in 
important Mathematical skills needed to pursue studies in Accounting, 
Business, Finance and Economics. Students are taught various topics in 
fundamental Algebra and Graphs with direct applications in the relevant 
fields.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• accurately perform basic calculations in algebra;  
• correctly apply the algebraic techniques learned to problem solving;  
• apply consistently the features of a straight line to selected problems;  
• solve and discuss economic and financial based problems by means of graphs, lines, 
functions and inequalities;  
• apply methodically non -linear functions to selected areas in the economic sciences;  
• calculate and apply exponential and logarithmic functions to selected problems;  
• apply concepts of percentage, rates and ratio;  
• logically reason problems using the skills that they have learned; and  
• reproduce formulas and apply techniques in order to solve economic and financial science 
related problems.  
 
SC.5.13. 4 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MATDCB1   Mathematics for Finance and Business 1B  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   MATDCA1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to teach students more intermediate 
Mathematical skills needed to pursue studies in Accounting, Business, 
Finance and Economics.  Students are taught various topics in Algebra, 
Financial Mathematics, Statistics and Calculus with direct applications in 
the rel evant fields.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• accurately perform time value of money calculations;  
• correctly apply time value of money to problem solving;  
• solve methodically, simultaneous equations and apply them to selected problems in the 
economic sciences;  
• determine by means of linear programming solutions to constrained problems;  
• perform and interpret descriptive statistics calculations;  
• determine and discuss probability related problems;  
• apply the rules of differentiation logically to selected areas in the financial and economic 
sciences;  
• logically reason problems using the skills that they have learned; and  
• reproduce formulas and apply techniques in order to solve economic and financial science 
related problems.  
 
 
 
  
   
143  
SC.5.13. 5 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   MT1ACP1   Mathematics for Finance and Business 1A (online)  
Qualification   Online Bachelor of Human Resource Management  (B34HRP)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     12 
Presentation   Online Semester module  
Prerequisites   Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 3 or  
 Mathematical Literacy Grade 12 – APS 5  
Assessment   Continuous Evaluation  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to give students a proper foundation in 
important Mathematical skills needed to pursue studies in Accounting, 
Business, Finance and Economics. Students are taught various topics in 
fundamental Algebra and Graphs with direct applications in the relevant fields.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• accurately perform basic calculations in algebra;  
• correctly apply the algebraic techniques learned to problem solving;  
• apply consistently the features of a straight line to selected problems;  
• solve and discuss economic and financial based problems by means of graphs, lines, 
functions and inequalities;  
• apply methodically non -linear functions to selected areas in the economic sciences;  
• calculate and apply exponential and logarithmic functions to selected problems;  
• apply concepts of percentage, rates and ratio;  
• logically reason problems using the skills that they have learned; and  
• reproduce formulas and apply techniques in order to solve economic and financial science 
related problems.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.6 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT1EA1   Pre-calculus  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     4 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites    Grade 12 Mathematics  APS 5 
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to prepare students for first -year Calculus 
by providing a solid foundation in algebra, trigonometry and one -variable 
functions.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to: 
• Master the algebra of real numbers including exponential and rational expressions.  
• Solve equalities and inequalities including those involving absolute values and polynomial and 
rational expressions.  
• Analyse, manipulate and sketch various functions, including inverse functions.  
• Develop a comprehensive understanding of polynomial and rational functions.  
• Demonstrate a thorough grasp of exponential and logarithmic functions.  
• Study the fundamentals of trigonometry and trigonometric functions, including radian measure.  
 
SC.5.1 3.7 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT2EB1   Calculus of one -variable functions  Part 1  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   MAT1EA1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to develop an understanding of basic 
mathematical logic, as well as limits and derivatives of one -variable 
functions . 
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define complex numbers and perform basic operations on complex numbers.  
• Understand and apply the basic ideas of mathematical logic.   
   
144 • Identify different proof techniques and apply them correctly to prove mathematical statements.  
• Define limits and use limit laws to evaluate basic limits.  
• Express the basic theoretic concepts underlying differentiation.  
• Master fundamental differentiation techniques. . 
 
 
SC.5.1 3.8 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT3EA1   Calculus of one -variable functions Part 2  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   MAT2EB1  
Purpose   Develop an understanding of advanced differentiation techniques of    
 one-variable functions, as well as the fundamental theory of integration.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Use sigma notation.  
• Evaluate limits of indeterminate form.  
• Master advanced differentiation techniques including implicit and logarithmic differentiation.  
• Integrate basic one variable function . 
 
 
SC.5.1 3.9 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MAT2EC1   Mathematics 1C2E (Bio & Enviro Math & Stats A)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   MAT1EA1  
Purpose   To provide the students with the basic knowledge and understanding of 
the principles of Mathematics and Statistics that are applicable to 
Botany, Zoology, Biochemistry and Microbiology and provide the 
necessary support to deal with calculations and the handling of data 
encountered in the curricula.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Manipulate algebraic expressions and equations.  
• Determine limits, and understand the properties of limits.  
• Apply trigonometric rules and assumptions to solve problems.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the basic tools and terminology of statistics.  
• Use the definition, properties and rules of probability and counting.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.10 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MAT3EC1   Mathem atics 1C 3E (Bio & Enviro Math & Stats B)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   MAT2EC1  
Purpose   To provide the students with the basic knowledge and understanding of 
the principles of Mathematics and Statistics that are applicable to 
Botany, Zoology, Biochemistry and Microbiology and provide the 
necessary support to deal with calculations and the handling of data 
encountered in the curricula.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply differentiation and integration to solve problems and/or address practical situations.  
• Determine and apply the sample distribution of the mean, proportions and differences between 
sample means for small and large samples.  
• Define, differentiate and apply regression and correlation statistical tools to situations/ 
relationships.  
 
  
   
145 SC.5.1 3.11 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT1CA1   Bio & Enviro Math & Stats  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   Mathematics Grade 12 APS 5  
Purpose   To provide the students with the basic knowledge and understanding of 
the principles of Mathematics and Statistics that are applicable to 
Botany, Zoology, Biochemistry and Microbiology and provide the 
necessary support to deal with calculations and the handling of data 
encountered in the curricula.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Manipulate algebraic expressions and equations.  
• Apply trigonometric rules and assumptions to solve problems.  
• Apply differentiation and integration to solve problems and/or address practical situations.  
• Demonstrate an understanding of the basic tools and terminology of statistics.  
• Use the definition, properties and rules of probability and counting.  
• Determine and apply the sample distribution of the mean, proportions and differences between 
sample means for small and large samples.  
• Define, differentiate and apply regression and correlation statistical tools to situations/ 
relationships.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.12 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT1DB1   Advanced Bio & Enviro Math  & Stats  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester  2  
Prerequisites   MAT1CA1  or MAT3EC1  
Purpose   To provide the students with the basic knowledge and understanding of 
the principles of Mathematics and Statistics that are applicable to 
Botany, Zoology, Biochemistry and Microbiology and provide the 
necessary support to deal with calculations and the han dling of data 
encountered in the curricula.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and use the standard techniques of calculus, both differential and integral, and utilize 
them to solve selected applied problems.  
• Recognize exact and nearly exact differential forms and solve related differential equations.  
• Construct and evaluate hypotheses tests.  
 
SC.5. 13.13 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT01A1   Calculus of one variable functions  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1  (Semester 2 for ASMA1A1)  
Prerequisites   Grade 12 Mathematics APS 6  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to develop  an understanding of basic 
mathematical logic, set theory and  the theory of differentiation and 
integration of one variable functions by means of first principles and 
otherwise, and to include an understanding of the key terms, concepts, 
facts, principles, rules and theories.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand and apply the basics concepts and operations of set theory.  
• Define absolute values and solve equations containing absolute values.  
• Identify different proof techniques and apply them correctly to prove mathematical 
statements.  
• Understand and apply the basic ideas of logic . 
• Define complex numbers and use their properties to perform operations on equations 
containing complex numbers.   
• Define limits and use limit laws to evaluate basic limits as well as limits of indeterminate form.  
• Express the basic theoretical concepts underlying differentiation and integration.  
• Differentiate and integrate basic exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric and hyperbolic 
functions.  
 
 
SC.5. 13.14 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module MAT01B1   Applications of Calculus  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2   (Semester 1 for ASMA1B1)  
Prerequisites   MAT01A1 or ASMA1A1 or MAT3EA1 or MATENA1  or ASME1A1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to develop an understanding of the 
applications of differentiation and integration of one variable functions, 
and to include an understanding of the key terms, concepts, facts, 
principles, rules and theories.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply different integration techniques to integrate exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric  and 
rational functions and evaluate improper integrals.  
• Sketch calculus functions using methods of graph sketching.  
• Apply the concepts of differentiation in solving calculus -related word problems.  
• Determine areas under curves and volumes of solids of revolution by applying techniques of 
integration.  
• Solve first -order differential equations.  
• Employ polar coordinates to parameterise curves.  
• Represent systems of linear equations using matrices and solve such systems using 
Gaussian elimination.  
• Comprehend the binomial theorem and use it to expand binomial expressions  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.15 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7  (First Year)  
 
Module  MATENA1   Calculus of one variable functions for Engineers  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 ( Semester 2 for ASME 1A1)  
Prerequisites   Grade 12 Mathematics APS 5 
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to develop an understanding of the main 
concepts of differentiation and integration of one variable functions by 
means of first principles and otherwise, and to include an understanding 
of the key terms, concepts, facts, principles  and rules.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Solve equations containing absolute values.  
• Identify different proof techniques and apply them correctly to prove mathematical 
statements.  
• Understand and apply the basic ideas of logic.  
• Use the properties of complex numbers to perform operations on equations containing complex 
numbers.  
• Use limit laws to evaluate basic limits as well as limits of indeterminate form.  
• Understand the concepts underlying differentiation and integration.  
• Differentiate and integrate basic exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric and hyperbolic 
functions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
147  
SC.5.1 3.16 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (First Year)  
 
Module   MATENB1   Applications of Calculus for Engineers  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  (Semester 1 for ASM E1B1)  
Prerequisites   MATENA1 or ASME1A1 or MAT01A1 or ASMA1A1 or MAT3EA1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to develop an understanding of the 
applications of differentiation and integration of one variable functions, 
and to include an understanding of the key terms, concepts, facts, 
principles and rules.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply different integration techniques to integrate exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric and 
rational functions and evaluate improper integrals.  
• Sketch calculus functions using methods of graph sketching.  
• Apply the concepts of differentiation in solving calculus -related word problems.  
• Determine areas under curves and volumes of solids of revolution by applying techniques of 
integration.  
• Solve first -order differential equations.  
• Employ polar coordinates to parameterise curves.  
• Represent systems of linear equations using matrices and solve such systems using 
Gaussian elimination.  
• Comprehend the binomial theorem and use it to expand binomial expressions.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.17 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL  7 (Second Year)  
 
Module MAT01A2   Sequences, Series and Vector Calculus  2A1 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1  (Semester 2 for ASMA2A1)  
Prerequisites   MAT01A1 or MATENA1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 or ASME1A1  
 and MAT01B1 or MATENB1 or ASMA1B1 or ASME1B1  
Purpose   The main purpose of this module is to enable students to develop 
proficiency, in dealing with aspects of sequences and series. 
Furthermore, the purpose extends to exposing the student to a wide 
variety of series estimation techniques which are essential in  applied 
science, to improve the problem solving skills of students and to form a 
basis of knowledge that would be necessary for further studies in 
Mathematics.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and apply basic concepts and theory underlying the convergence of sequences and 
series , and apply the precise definition of convergence where necessary.  
• Describe and apply basic concepts and theory underlying the Taylor and Maclaurin series of 
functions , as well as approximate functions by polynomials .  
• Extend and apply the calculus of single -variable functions to vector -valued functions.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.18 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module MAT02A2   Linear Algebra 2A2 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1 (Semester 2 for ASMA2A2)  
Prerequisites   MAT01A1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 or MATENA1 or ASME1A1)  
 and (MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1 or ASME1B1)   
   
148 Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc and 
BSc Information Technology qualification s is to:  
o Provide the students with a well -rounded and broad education that 
equips them with the mathematical knowledge base, theory and 
methodology of disciplines that could serve as a basis for entry into 
the mathematically orientated labour market, professional training 
and practice and postgraduate studies.  
o Enable the students to demonstrate initiative and responsibility in 
mathematics related careers.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and comprehend the basic theoretical concepts underlying Linear Algebra.  
• Comprehend the geometry and the algebra of vectors.  
• Solve linear systems.  
• Comprehend the algebra of Matrices . 
• Apply matrices and linear transformation to solve mathematically related problems . 
• Comprehend concepts relating to generalised vector spaces and subspaces.  
• State and prove theorems in Linear Algebra.  
 
SC.5.1 3.19 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module MAT04A2   Discrete Mathematics  - IT (Mathematics 2A4)  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 1 (Semester 2 for ASMA2A4)  
Prerequisites  MAT01A1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 and  
MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1  or ASME1B1  
Purpose   To equip students with a detailed knowledge of three areas within 
discrete mathematics, namely mathematical logic, number theory and 
combinatorics - including an understanding of and an ability to apply the 
main concepts, techniques, methods, and results from these three 
areas.  In doing so, contributing to a knowledge base for application in 
other disciplines , especially computer science and information 
technology.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate an integrated knowledge of the core concepts, theory, and techniques relating to 
the syntax and semantics of propositional and predicate logic and to selected deductive systems 
for these languages.  
• Construct correct and appropriate combinatorial strategies for the efficient solution of counting 
problems.  
• Apply the  theory and techniques of basic number theory to solve problems relating to properties 
of divisibility and modular arithmetic, and to construct and use RSA cryptographic terms.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.20 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module MAT01B2   Multivariable and Vector Calculus  2B1 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 2  (Semester 1 for ASMA2B1)  
Prerequisites  MAT01A1 or MATENA1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 or ASME1A1 
and MAT01B1  or MATENB1 or ASMA1B1 or ASME1B1 and 
MAT01A2 or ASMA2A1  
Purpose   The main purpose of this module is to extended concepts such as limits 
and continuity, mostly studied in first year calculus, to functions of 
several variables. Furthermore, the purpose extends to broaden the 
student's function optimization and integration  techniques, to improve 
the problem solving skills of students and to form a basis of knowledge 
that would be necessary for further studies in Mathematics.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Investigate continuit y of several variable functions, using the precise definition of a limit, where 
necessary.   
   
149 • Determine limits, gradients, partial derivat ives and directional derivatives and apply these 
concepts to problem solving.  
• Apply optimization theory to problems.  
• Determine and evaluate multiple integrals and extend use of double and triple integrals to the 
physical sciences.  
• Extend and apply multiple integration techniques to vector -valued functions.  
 
SC.5.1 3.21 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module MAT02B2   Linear Algebra 2B2 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 2   (Semester 1 for ASMA2B2)  
Prerequisites  (MAT01A1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 or MATENA1 or ASME1A1) 
and AT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1 or ASME1B1 and 
MAT02A2 or ASMA2A2  
Purpose   The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc and 
BSc Information Technology qualification s is to:  
o Provide the students with a well -rounded and broad education that 
equips them with the mathematical knowledge base, theory and 
methodology of disciplines that could serve as a basis for entry into 
the mathematically orientated labour market, professional t raining 
and practice and postgraduate studies.  
o Enable the students to demonstrate initiative and responsibility in 
mathematics related careers.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and comprehend the basic theoretical concepts underlying Linear Algebra.  
• State and prove theorems in Linear Algebra.  
• Comprehend the concept of orthogonality.  
• Define concepts on vector spaces and subspaces.  
• Determine eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a given matrix.  
• Comprehend the concepts and the theory of linear transformations.  
• Comprehend the concepts and the theory of inner product spaces.  
• Apply the theory of vector spaces and inner product spaces to solve related problems . 
 
 
SC.5.1 3.22 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module MAT04B2   Introductory Abstract Algebra – IT (Mathematics 2B4)  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     10 
Presentation   Semester 2  (Semester 1 for ASMA2B4)  
Prerequisites  MAT01A1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 and MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 
and MAT02A2 or ASMA2A2 and MAT04A2 or ASMA2A4  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module is to equip students with a detailed 
knowledge of groups in abstract algebra and of combinatorial graphs, 
including an understanding of and an ability to apply the main concepts, 
techniques and results of this field.  In doing so, contributing to a 
knowledge base for application in other disciplines.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and explain groups and recognize elementary properties of groups.  
• Determine subgroups as well as cyclic subgroups and generators.  
• Distinguish between isomorphisms, homomorphisms and automorphisms.  
• Formulate theorems and proofs related to group theory.  
• Demonstrate a thorough understanding of cosets, normal subgroups and external direct products.  
• Correctly use and apply the basic terminology and concepts relating to combinatorial graphs.  
• Apply path algorithms and tree traversal algorithms to problems involving graphs.  
• Solve real world problems via graph theoretic modelling, e .g. solve scheduling problems by modelling 
as graph colouring problems.  
   
   
150  
SC.5.1 3.23 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module   MATEAA2   Engineering Linear Algebra 2A2 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 1 (Semester 2 for ASM E2A2)  
Prerequisites  (MAT01A1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 or MATENA1 or ASME1A1) 
and (MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1 or ASME1B1)  
Purpose  The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the 
Engineering qualification is to:  
o Provide the students with a well -rounded and broad education that 
equips them with the mathematical knowledge base, theory and 
methodology of disciplines that could serve as a basis for  the 
Engineering qualification and  entry into the mathematically orientated 
labour market . 
o Enable the students to demonstrate initiative and responsibility in 
mathematics related careers.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Utilize the basic concepts underlying Linear Algebra.  
• Utilize the geometry and the algebra of vectors.  
• Solve linear systems.  
• Apply the algebra of Matrices.  
• Apply matrices and linear transformation to solve mathematically related problems . 
• Utilize concepts relating to generalised vector spaces and subspaces.  
• Apply the knowledge -base to relevant applications.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.24 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module  MATEAB2   Engineering Linear Algebra 2B2  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 2  (Semester 1 for ASM E2B2)  
Prerequisites   MAT01A1 or MAT3EA1 or ASMA1A1 or MATENA1 or ASME1A1) 
and (MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1 or ASME1B1) and 
(MAT02A2 or ASMA2A2 or MATEAA2 or ASME2A2)  
Purpose   The primary purpose of this module as an integral part of the BSc 
qualification, Engineering qualification and Information Technology 
qualification is to:  
o Provide the students with a well -rounded and broad education that 
equips them with the mathematical knowledge base, theory and 
methodology of disciplines that could serve as a basis for entry into 
the mathematically orientated labour market, professional training 
and practice and postgraduate studies.  
o Enable the students to demonstrate initiative and responsibility in 
mathematics related careers.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Utilize the basic theoretical concepts underlying Linear Algebra.  
• Utilize the concepts of orthogonality.  
• Apply concepts on vector spaces and subspaces.  
• Determine eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a given matrix.  
• Utilize the theory of linear transformations.  
• Utilize the theory of inner product spaces.  
• Apply the theory of vector spaces and inner product spaces to solve related problems.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
151  
SC.5.1 3.25 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module   MATECA2   Engineering Sequences, Series and Vector Calculus  2A1 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 1  (Semester 2 for ASM E2A1)  
Prerequisites  MAT01A1 or MATENA1 or ASMA1A1 or ASME1A1  
and MAT01B1 or MATENB1 or ASMA1B1 or ASME1B1  
Purpose   The main purpose of this module is to enable students to develop 
proficiency, in dealing with aspects of sequences and series. 
Furthermore, the purpose extends to exposing the student to a wide 
variety of series estimation techniques which are essential in  applied 
science, to improve the problem solving skills of students and to form a 
basis of knowledge that would be necessary for completion of their 
degree.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply basic concepts and theory underlying the convergence of sequences and series.  
• Apply basic concepts and theory underlying the Taylor and Maclaurin series of functions.  
• Apply the calculus of single -variable functions to vector -valued functions.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.26 MATH EMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module   MATECB2   Engineering Multivariable and Vector Calculus  2B1 
NQF Level     7 
Credits     7.5 
Presentation   Semester 2 (Semester 1 for ASM E2B1)  
Prerequisites  MAT01A1 or MATENA1 or ASMA1A1 or ASME1A1  
and MAT01B1 or MATENB1 or ASMA1B1 or ASME1B1 and 
MAT01B2 or MATECA2 or ASMA2A1 or ASME2A1  
Purpose   The main purpose of this module is to extended concepts such as limits 
and continuity, mostly studied in first year calculus, to functions of 
several variables. Furthermore, the purpose extends to broaden the 
student's function optimization and integration  techniques, to improve 
the problem solving skills of students and to form a basis of knowledge 
that would be necessary for completion of their degree.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Investigate continuity of several variable functions.  
• Determine limits, gradients, partial derivatives and directional derivatives and apply these 
concepts to problem solving.  
• Apply optimization theory to problems.  
• Determine and evaluate multiple integrals and extend use of double and triple integrals to the 
physical sciences.  
• Apply multiple integration techniques to vector -valued functions.  
 
 
SC.5.1 3.27 MATHEMATICS    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module MAT01A3   Real Analysis  (Mathematics 3A1)  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Prerequisites   MAT01A2  or ASMA2A1  
Purpose  To equip students with a rigorous treatment of concepts, theory and 
properties of the real numbers and continuous functions.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be  able to:  
• Define and explain the Completeness Property of the real numbers.  
• Describe the theory and properties of sequences and continuous functions.  
• Demonstrate a thorough understanding of the theory of the Riemann Integral.  
• Solve problems related to the abovementioned topics.   
   
152 SC.5.1 3.28 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module MAT02A3  Discrete Mathematics  (Mathematics 3A2)  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 1 
Prerequisites  MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1  or ASME1B1  
Purpose   To equip students with an integrated knowledge of the main concepts, 
techniques, methods and results from four areas within discrete 
mathematics, namely set theory, propositional logic, graph  theory and 
combinatorics, thus contributing to a knowledge base for further studies 
in mathematics and for application in other disciplines.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Demonstrate a mastery of the basic theory involving sets, relations and order and be able to 
solve problems , related to these topics.  
• Demonstrate an integrated knowledge of the core concepts, theory, and techniques relating to 
the syntax and semantics of propositional logic and to selected deductive systems for this 
language.  
• Construct correct and appropriate combinatorial strategies for the efficient solution of counting 
problems.  
• Apply the core theory and techniques of basic graph theory to prove propositions and solve 
problems . 
 
SC.5.1 3.29 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module MAT01B3   Complex Analysis  (Mathematics 3B1)  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     15 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  MAT01B2  or ASMA2B1  
Purpose  To introduce students to the theory of complex functions which is 
considered a classical discipline in pure mathematics with applications 
in various fields.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Check for analyticity of a given complex function by using the Cauchy -Riemann equations.  
• Graphically represent the images of regions under various conformal mappings.  
• Calculate integrals from first principles.  
• Calculate integrals using Cauchy’s integral formulas as well as by using the Residue method.  
• Calculate the Laurent series of a given complex function centred at a given point.  
• Calculate difficult real integrals by using methods from complex analysis.      
 
SC.5.1 3.30 MATHEMATICS LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  MAT02B3   Introductory Abstract Algebra  (Mathematics 3B2)  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   MAT02A2  or ASMA2A2  
Purpose  A study of concepts, theory and applications of groups and rings that 
equips students with an integrated knowledge base for further studies 
in mathematics (i.e an honours in mathematics) and for application in 
other disciplines.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define the basic concepts and theory of integers, groups and rings: prime factorization  
divisibility, equivalence relations, groups, subgroups, normal subgroups, quotient groups, 
homomorphisms, isomorphisms and introductory concepts to rings and fields.  
• Formulate and proof the basic theorems of integers, groups and rings: prime factorization 
divisibility, equivalence relations, groups, subgroups, normal subgroups, quotient groups, 
homomorphisms, isomorphisms and introductory concepts to rings and fields.  
• Solve problems by first analysing  it and then applying integrated knowledge in the above -
mentioned topics using the theory of abstract algebra.   
   
153 SC.5.1 3.31 MATHEMATICS LEVEL 6 (First Year)  
 
Module   MAEB0A1  Basic Mathematics and Applications in Economics & Business A  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester 1 (Couplet with MAEB0B1)  
Prerequisites  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 3 or Mathematical Literacy Grade 
12 – APS 6  
Purpose   This module is foundational in nature, specifically designed to cover 
selected applications in the economic sciences. It has as its primary 
purpose, the development of specific mathematical skills (relevant to 
the economic sciences) for students to cope wi th the mathematical 
demands of relevant regular modules in BCom degree programmes.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Perform basic algebraic operations accurately ; 
• Apply consistently, the features of a straight line to selected problems in the economic sciences ; 
• Solve methodically, simultaneous equations and apply them to selected problems in the 
economic sciences ; 
• Apply methodically non -linear functions to selected areas in the economic sciences ; 
• Apply the rules of differentiation logically to selected areas in the economic sciences . 
 
SC.5.1 3.32 MATHEMATICS LEVEL 6 (First Year)  
 
Module   MAEB0B1  Basic Mathematics and Applications in Economics & Business B   
NQF Level    6 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  MAEB0A1  with 40% (Couplet)  
Purpose   This module is foundational in nature, specifically designed to cover 
selected applications in the economic sciences.  It has as its primary 
purpose, the development of specific mathematical skills (relevant to 
the economic sciences) for students to cope with the mathematical 
demands of relevant regular modules in BCom degree programmes.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply consistently, the features of a straight line to selected problems in the economic sciences ; 
• Apply the rules of differentiation to selected areas in the economic sciences, logically ; 
• Determine, and interpret logically, selected variables/elements relating to finance ; 
• Interpret selected concepts relating to basic statistics clearly and undertake calculations 
involving such concepts.  
 
SC.5.1 3.33 MATHEMATICS LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MAT100  Business Mathematics 100  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    14 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Prerequisites  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose   The course consists of a basic introduction to Mathematical topics in the 
fields of Algebra, Calculus, Financial Mathematics, Discrete 
Mathematics and Statistics.  A few applications of these Mathematic 
topics in Accounting, Economics and Finance are covered. This will 
allow students to observe and practice the practical applications of 
Mathematics to the relevant fields.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Accurately perform basic calculations in Algebra ; 
• Accurately determine limits, continuity intervals, derivatives and integrals using various 
techniques and rules ; 
• Accurately perform basic calculations in Financial Mathematics ; 
• Accurately perform basic calculations in Discrete Mathematics ; 
• Accurately perform basic calculations in Statistics; and  
• Correctly apply all the skills that they have learnt in Accounting, Economics and Business.   
   
154  
SC.5.1 4 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS                                                                       STA  
 
 
1. All modules ( STA01A1 , STA01B1 , STA02A2 , STA02B2 , STA03A3  and STA03B3 ) have a 
practical component that makes up 30% of the semester mark.  
2. Tutorials and practical classes are compulsory. These classes form an integral part of the 
module and no student will be excused from them. The procedure pertaining to absence from 
these sessions will be detailed in each module’s study guide.  
3. No exemption from tutorial and practical classes will be granted for modules that were failed 
and are repeated.  
4. A student needs a semester mark of 40% to gain entrance to the final assessment opportunity. 
The semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student needs a final mark of 50% 
to pass a module. The semester mark also contributes to the result of a  supplementary 
assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is capped on 50%.  
 
 
SC.5.1 4.1 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 6 (First Year)  
 
Module  STA1EB1  Statistics 1A1E   
NQF Level   5 
Credits    12 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Pre-requisite  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose   To provide the student with the ability to define basic concepts and 
terms commonly used in statistics, to show how a set of data can be 
organised in a meaningful way and presented so as to reveal or 
enhance its fundamental properties. The student will als o be provided 
with a basic perspective of probability and probability distributions, 
index numbers and time series and be able to apply them to solve 
problems in various fields of applications.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify different data collection methods and distinguish between different measurement 
scales.  
• Calculate and interpret basic descriptive statistics from a set of data.  
• Summarize data using suitable tables and graphs to portray discrete and continuous 
distributions.  
• Define and apply the basic concepts of probability theory.  
• Calculate and interpret probabilities from the binomial, Poisson and normal probability distributions.  
• Calculate and interpret simple and composite index numbers.  
• Describe and calculate basic components such as trend and seasonal effects of a time series.  
 
 
SC.5.1 4.2 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS    LEVEL 6 (First Year)  
 
Module STA2EA1  Statistical Inference  
NQF Level   5 
Credits    12 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Pre-requisite  STA1EB1  
Purpose    To provide the student with a perspective of simple linear regression, 
the basics of hypothesis testing and to illustrate their application to the 
solution of practical problems so that students will be able to apply them 
to solve problems in various fields of application.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Measure and model linear relationships between two variables through simple linear regression 
and correlation analysis.  
• Define what a sampling distribution is and distinguish between different sampling distributions.  
• Perform hypothesis tests for a population mean, population proportion and population variance.  
• Construct and interpret confidence intervals for a population mean, population proportion and 
population variance . 
  
   
155  
SC.5.1 4.3 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 7 (First Year)  
 
Module STA01A1   Distribution Theory  
NQF Level    5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Pre-requisite  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 6  
Purpose   To provide the student with a perspective of the basics of probability 
theory and to illustrate its application to the solution of practical 
problems.  The student will also give a basic perspective of a variety of 
discrete probability distributions and will be able to apply them to solve 
problems in various fields of application.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and apply the basic concepts of probability theory.  
• Define and apply random variables, their joint distributions and probability densities.  
 
 
SC.5.1 4.4 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS    LEVEL 7 (First Year)  
 
Module STA01B1   Statistical Inference  
NQF Level    5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Pre-requisite   STA01A1  or STA2EA1  
Purpose    To provide the student with a perspective of the basics of probability 
theory and to illustrate its application to the solution of practical 
problems. The student will also give a basic perspective of a variety of 
continuous probability distributions and will be able to apply them to 
solve problems in various fields of application. The student will also 
have a fundamental perspective of statistical inference and be able to 
solve elementary inference problems in various fields of application.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and apply the basic concepts of probability theory.  
• Define and apply continuous random variables, their joint distributions and probability densities.  
• Explain the concepts of random sampling, statistical inference and sampling distributions, and 
state and use basic sampling distributions related to the normal distribution.  
 
 
SC.5.1 4.5 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module STA02A2   Probability Theory  
NQF Level    6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1 
Pre-requisites   STA01B1 , MAT01B1  (or ASMA1B 1) or MATENB1 (or ASME1B1)  
Purpose    To provide the student with an advanced perspective of probability 
theory and to illustrate its application to the solution of practical problems. 
The student will also give an advanced perspective of a variety of 
probability distributions, their interrela tionships their use in solving 
problems in various fields of application.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand and apply the general rules of probability theory  
• Define the densities and derive the probability/moment generating functions of several types of 
commonly occurring discrete random variables.  
• Understand and apply the elements of continuous distribution theory . 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
156  
SC.5.1 4.6 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module STA02B2   Statistical Inference and Distribution Theory  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Pre-requisite   STA02A2  
Purpose   To provide the student with an advanced perspective of continuous 
distribution theory and to illustrate its application to the solution of 
practical problems. The student will also be given an advanced 
perspective of a variety of statistical inference procedures and thei r use 
in solving problems in various fields of application.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Understand and apply the general rules of continuous distribution theory  
• Define the densities and derive the moment/cumulant generating functions of several types of 
commonly occurring continuous random variables.  
• Explain the concepts of random sampling, statistical inference and sampling distributions.  
• Describe and apply the main methods of estimation and the main properties of estimators.  
 
 
SC.5.1 4.7 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   STA03A3   Linear Models  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Pre-requisites   STA02B2 , MAT01A2  (or ASMA2A1), MAT02B2  (or ASMA2B2)  
Purpose  To provide the student with a knowledge of various linear and 
generalised linear models, how to find parameter estimates, how to 
deduce the distributions of suitable statistics and how to apply these to 
solve problems involving real world data.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and apply the general linear model.  
• Explain the concept of a generalised linear model and illustrate its use in problem solving.  
 
 
SC.5.1 4.8 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   STA03B3  Stochastic Processes  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Pre-requisites  STA02B2 , MAT01A2  (or ASMA2A1)  
Purpose   To provide the student with a knowledge of a variety of stochastic 
processes and time series models and with the ability to apply them to 
solve problems in various substantive fields.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define Markov processes and their classification into types. Define and derive transition 
probabilities and associated quantities.   
• Define and apply the main concepts and general properties of stationary univariate time series 
models  
 
   
   
157 SC.5.1 4.9 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   STAE0A3 Statistics for Engineers  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    20 
Presentation  Semester 1 
Pre-requisite  MATENB1 (or ASME1B1 or MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1)  
Purpose   After completion of the module the learner will understand the basic 
elements of probability theory, random variables and processes, and 
statistical inference, and be able to apply this knowledge to solve 
problems.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• State and apply the basic axioms of probability theory in order to compute the probability of 
simple events  
• State and apply the addition rules, conditional probability rules, Bayes’ formula, multiplication 
rules and statistical independence.  
• State the probability distribution and density functions of various discrete and continuous 
random variables, evaluate associated probabilities and determine the moments and other 
properties of these random variables  
• Apply the joint distribution and probability mass function of discretely valued random variables 
to compute probabilities and expected values of functions of the random variables.  
• Define a random process and apply it to model measurement noise and other random signals.  
• Derive the expected value function and the autocorrelation function of a given random process.  
• Apply pictorial and tabular techniques, such as empirical distributions, histograms, etc. for 
depicting statistical data.  
• Compute statistical measures of location and variability, such as sample mean, sample 
variance, median, quantiles, percentiles, etc.  
• State the Central Limit Theorem, and define the various sampling distributions  
(eg.t, chi -squared, F).  
• Compute the confidence intervals and apply hypothesis testing for parameters of a population, 
for example, the population mean, the population variance, etc.  
• Compute the reliability of parallel and series combinations of subsystems.  
 
 
 
 
SC.5.1 5 MICROBIOLOGY                                                                                           MCB  
 
Attendance at pr actical classes is compulsory.  Absence from a practical class will only be 
condoned on presentation of a very good reason substantiated by a certificate from an acceptable 
source, this certificate to be submitted to the department within 5 working days. Any student absent 
from a practical class without permission will not be permitted entry to the final assessment 
opportunity.  
 
The relative weightings for determining the module mark applied to theory and practical 
assessments are:  (Theory:  Practical)  
 
MCB02A2  70:30  
MCB02B2  70:30  
 
 
SC.5.1 6.1  MICROBIOLOGY   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   MCB02A2    Bacteriology and Virology  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   BIO10A1 or BIO 1A1E and BIO2EA1, CEM01A1 or CEM1AC1 and 
CEM01B1 or CEM1DB1   
   
158 Purpose  The purpose of the Bacteriology component is to provide learners 
with a well -rounded and basic knowledge of prokaryotes such as 
bacteria. Upon completion of this module a learner will be able to 
discuss and explain the morphology, reproduction and overall 
importance of bacteria.  The learners will have had experience in 
handling different types of bacteria in a safe manner and perform 
laboratory investigations without posing a risk to the environment or 
colleagues. The learner will also be able to explain t he uses and roles 
of bacteria in industrial, medical and environmental contexts.  
 
The primary purpose of Virology is to provide learners with a basic 
knowledge of the viral group and its diseases.  Upon completion of 
this module, a learner should be able to describe the fundamental 
principles of virology: taxonomy, classification & morp hology of the 
viruses.  The learners should also understand viral infection of plant, 
animal and bacterial tissue, as well as viral identification and 
cultivation techniques. The learner should be able to recognize 
certain diseases, its causal factor, symp toms, as well as the mode of 
transmission, incubation and infection of the host.  Learners will be 
made to understand that viruses cause diseases but have 
advantages to their existence too (their use in cancer treatment & 
recombinant DNA technology).  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the learner should be able to:  
• Describe the significance of bacteria  
• Summarise the discovery of bacteria and spontaneous generation  
• Discuss the morphology & reproduction of the bacterium  
• Discuss growth and cultivation of bacteria  
• Explain sterility, sterilisation & conditions affecting the action of antimicrobial treatments  
• Discuss water quality and the development of bacterial water borne diseases  
• Discuss food preservation and the development of bacterial food borne diseases  
• Debate the advantages & disadvantages of bacterial flora of the body  
• Summarise the cause, symptoms and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases caused by 
bacteria  
• Conduct practical work and experiments and demonstrate safe laboratory techniques  
• Use a microscope correctly & present practical results by writing appropriate reports by correctly 
using appropriate terminology.  
• Discuss the classification, morphology and replication of plant & animal viruses, and 
bacteriophages  
• Explain the various isolation, identification and cultivation techniques used by virologists  
• Discuss and explain viral disease development and how it influences/triggers the immune 
system  
• Summarise the cause, symptoms, significance and treatment of certain viral diseases  
• Demonstrate virtual HHMI ELISA and enzyme tests  
• Complete answer sheets regarding prudently selected viral disease videos  
• Present results correctly using appropriate terminology.  
 
 
SC.5.1 5.2 MICROBIOLOGY   LEVEL 7 (Second Year)  
 
Module   MCB02B2   Microbial Diversity and Plant Pathology  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   BIO10A1 or BIO 1A1E and BIO2EA1, CEM01A1 or CEM1AC1 
and CEM01B1 or   
 CEM1DB1   
   
159 Purpose  The primary purpose of Microbial diversity is to provide learners 
with a basic knowledge of the various microbial groups (Archaea & 
Protists) in order for them to make sense of the diversity of 
organisms.  
 
Upon completion of this module, a learner should be able to 
organize groups into a classification system and describe the 
fundamental similarities and differences between the 
microorganisms, regarding structure, metabolism, habitat, 
reproduction and diseas es. 
 
The primary purpose of the Plant Pathology component is to 
provide learners with a well -rounded and basic education of the 
Steps of an Outbreak Investigation and Development of plant 
diseases. Upon completion a learner will be able to describe the 
fundamen tal principles and importance of plant pathology  and 
epidemiology. The learner will also be able to distinguish between 
healthy & “sick” plants. The learner will be able to list and discuss 
the steps in disease development and the control thereof. Certain 
plant diseases will be reviewed. The learner will be able to analyse 
and compare different types of fungi in a safe manner and perform 
laboratory investigations without posing a risk to the environment 
or colleagues.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the learner should be able to:  
• Have a clear understanding of concepts used in the study of microbiology.  
• List the differences between groups of prokaryotes and eukaryotes: morphology, metabolism, 
taxonomy, distribution and habitat.  
• Be in a position  to compare and contrast the general and diagnostic features of the following 
groups: Protozoans and Archaea.  
• Identify the symptoms, cause, development and treatment of diseases caused by Protozoans 
and Archaea.  
• Be in a position  to identify, draw, annotate/label and classify giving reasons.  
• Be able to integrate the theory and the practical work into one coherent unit.  
• Explain the concept of plant pathology and categorize plant diseases.  
• Recognize and describe the effect of the abiotic and biotic environment on the development of 
plant disease.  
• Explain the influence of genetic interaction of a host.  
• Define concepts in disease development and explain the steps involved in plant disease 
development.  
• Discuss various plant diseases regarding symptoms and control.  
• Demonstrate safe laboratory techniques and conduct practical experiments safely.  
• Present practical results by writing appropriate reports using appropriate terminology.  
 
 
 
SC.5.1 6 PHYSICS                                                                                                         PHY 
 
Practicals  
Experimental courses in Physics consist of a Theory part and a Practical part, both of which run for 
the duration of the semester in which the course is offered.  A semester mark is compiled from the 
Theory and Practical.  
 
1. The Practical mark counts 30% of the semester mark for the particular course.  
 
2. If a student is repeating a course, they may apply for exemption of the Practical provided he/she 
has previously obtained at least 50% for the relevant Practical. Should a student meet the 
criteria and exercise the option of exemption from a Practical, the formerly obtained Practical 
mark will count 30%  towards the final semester mark. A student repeating a module will 
only be given exemption from the practical component of that module if a mark of 50% 
for the practical work was obtained in the three years prior to the present academic year.  
  
   
160 3. A sub -minimum of 50% is required for the Practical mark, in conjunction with a sub -minimum 
of 40% for the Theory mark of a particular course in order to gain entrance to the exam for that 
specific module.  
 
4. Attendance of all scheduled practicals is compulsory.  
 
Times for practicals  
First year   : 1 x 4 hours per week  
Second year  : 1 x 4 hours per week  
Third year   : 1 x 3.5 hours per week  
 
Further Examination entrance requirements  
1. If a student is found to have attended less than 70% of lectures during a semester in a particular 
course, such a student may be refused entrance to the exam for that course.  
2. The semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student needs a final mark of 50% 
to pass a module. The semester mark also contributes to the result of a supplementary 
assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is capped on 50%.  
 
 
SC.5.1 6.1 PHYSICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  PHY1EA1  Physics 1A1E  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    4 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation of the laws, principles  
and methods in elementary mechanics. Through the acquisition of 
appropriate skills, the student will discover the application of elementary 
mechanics with the emphasis on fundamental mathematical techniques 
involved in solving Physics problems. Several me chanics topics will be 
covered in these topics. Students will also be exposed to basics of simple 
harmonic motion including mechanical wave properties and the proper 
mathematical expressions of these concepts. A student who has completed 
Physics 1A1E will be in a position to proceed and undertake the next 
module, Physics 1A2E.  and PHYL02E  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss  and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, basic principles and 
the basic laws of elementary mechanics, simple harmonic motion, and elasticity and waves and 
sounds.  
• Derive equations, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in elementary 
mechanics, simple harmonic motion and elasticity, and waves and sounds.   
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems of elementary mechanics.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of the topics covered in this module in 
everyday life.  
 
SC.5.1 6.2 PHYSICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module PHY2EB1  Physics 1A2E  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    10 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Pre-requisite  PHY1EA1  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation of the laws, principles 
and methods in elementary mechanics. Through the acquisition of 
appropriate skills, the student will discover the application of mechanics 
both in linear and rotational dimensions. S tudents will be able to reflect on 
the role of these concepts of physics, in our technological environment. A 
student who has completed Physics 1A2E will be in a position to proceed 
and undertake the next module, Physics 1A3E.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss  and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, basic principles and 
the basic laws of elementary mechanics in both dimensions, that is, linear and rotational .  
   
161 • Derive equations, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in elementary 
mechanics .  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems of elementary mechanics.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of the topics covered in this module in 
everyday life . 
 
 
SC.5.1 6.3 PHYSICS   LEVEL 5 (Second Year)  
 
Module PHY3EA1  Physics 1A3E  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    10 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Prerequisites  PHY2EB1  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation of the laws, principles 
and methods in mechanics, oscillations and mechanical waves, and 
thermodynamics. Through the acquisition of appropriate skills, the student 
will discover the application of these topics and be able to reflect on the role 
of these concepts of physics, in our technological environment.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws encountered in mechanics, oscillations and mechanical waves, and 
thermodynamics . 
• Derive equations, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in basic 
mechanics, oscillations and mechanical waves, and thermodynamics . 
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve elementary problems in mechanics, oscillations 
and mechanical waves, and thermodynamics . 
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of the topics covered in this module in 
everyday life.  
 
 
SC.5.1 6.4 PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   PHYG1A1   General Physics for Earth Sciences  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Purpose  Providing the first -year geology and earth science student with 
intellectual and practical skills to analyse, interpret and apply certain 
elementary laws in physics applicable to the broader earth sciences. 
Through the acquisition of appropriate skills, th e student will discover 
the application of these laws to their daily environment as an earth 
scientist/ physics student.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws of physics applicable to the earth sciences.  
• Explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in physics applied to the earth 
sciences.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems of elementary physics applied to the 
earth sciences.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary physics as applied in a 
geological and earth science context.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
162 SC.5.1 6.5 PHYSICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  PHYG1B1   Physics of the Earth and its Natural Environment  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  PHYG0A1  
Purpose  Providing the first year  student with intellectual and practical skills to 
analyse, interpret and apply certain elementary laws in Physics with 
applications to the broader earth sciences. Through the acquisition of 
appropriate skills, the student will discover the application of these laws 
to their daily environment as an earth scientist/ physics student. In 
particular, the course provides the physical foundation needed for the 
understanding of geological and geomorphological processes, the 
oceans, the atmosphere and weather and t he solar system.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws of Physics relevant to the broader earth sciences.  
• Understanding the physical functioning of basic natural phenomena related to the earth, the 
atmosphere, the oceans and the solar system.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of physics in the geological, geographical and 
natural environment.  
 
SC.5.1 6.6 PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   PHE2LB1   Physics for Life Sciences L02E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisite   PHY1EA1  
Purpose  Providing the first year  life science student with intellectual and practical 
skills to analyse, interpret and apply certain elementary laws in Physics 
in the context of the life sciences. Through the acquisition of appropriate 
skills, the student will discover the application of  these laws to their daily 
environment as a biological scientist/ physics student.  
Module learning outcomes :  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss  and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws of physics applicable to the life sciences.  
• Explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in physics applied to the life 
sciences.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems of elementary physics applied to the 
life sciences.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary physics as applied in a 
biological context.  
 
SC.5.1 6.7 PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   PHE3LA1   Physics for Life Sciences L03E  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisite   PH2LB1  
Purpose  Providing the first year  life science student with intellectual and practical 
skills to analyse, interpret and apply certain elementary laws in Physics 
in the context of the life sciences. Through the acquisition of appropriate 
skills, the student will discover the application of  these laws to their daily 
environment as a biological scientist/ physics student.  
Module learning outcomes :  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss  and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws of physics applicable to the life sciences.   
   
163 • Explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in physics applied to the life 
sciences.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems of elementary physics applied to the 
life sciences.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary physics as applied in a 
biological context.  
 
 
SC.5.1 6.8 PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   PHYL1A1   Physics for Life Sciences 1A  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Purpose  Providing the first year  life science student with intellectual and practical 
skills to analyse, interpret and apply certain elementary laws in Physics 
in the context of the life sciences. Through the acquisition of appropriate 
skills, the student will discover the application of  these laws to their daily 
environment as a biological scientist/ physics student.  
Module learning outcomes :  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws of physics applicable to the life sciences.  
• Explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in physics applied to the life 
sciences.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems of elementary physics applied to the 
life sciences.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary physics as applied in a 
biological context.  
 
 
SC.5.1 6.9 PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module PHYS1A1   Introductory Physics A (for Physics major)  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Pre-requisite   Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation for the laws, principles 
and methods used in elementary mechanics, waves and heat from the 
perspective of a physicist. Through the acquisition of appropriate skills, the 
student will discover the applicatio n of the laws, principles and methods 
relating to elementary mechanics, waves and heat, and will be able to reflect 
on the role thereof in physics and the technological environment.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws encountered in elementary mechanics, waves and heat.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in basic 
mechanics, waves and heat.  
• Demonstrate a sufficiently deep conceptual understanding of elementary mechanics, waves 
and heat to tackle advanced level Physics topics.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve elementary problems in basic mechanics, waves 
and heat.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary mechanics, waves and heat in 
everyday life.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
164 SC.5.1 6.10 PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module PHYS1B1  Introductory Physics B (Physics major)  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  PHY1S0A1  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation of the laws, 
principles and methods in elementary electricity and magnetism from 
the perspective of a physicist.  Through the acquisition of appropriate 
skills, the student will discover the application of elementary electricity 
and magnetism, optics and special relativity and will be able to reflect 
on the role thereof in physics and the technological environment.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss  and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic principles 
and the basic laws encountered in elementary electricity and magnetism, optics and special 
relativity.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in basic 
electricity and magnetism, optics and special relativity.  
• Demonstrate a sufficiently deep conceptual understanding of elementary electricity and 
magnetism, optics and special relativity to tackle advanced level Physics topics.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve elementary problems in basic electricity and 
magnetism, optics and special relativity.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary electricity and magnetism, 
optics and special relativity in everyday life.  
 
 
 
SC.5.1 6.11 PHYSICS    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  PHY00A2   Classical Mechanics and Special Relativity  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     16 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   PHYS1B1  and MAT01B1  or ASMA1B1  or MATENB1  
 or ASME1B1  
Purpose  o Providing qualifying students with intellectual and practical skills to 
analyse, interpret and apply scientific laws and methods in various 
reference frames, advanced Newtonian mechanics, gravitational 
and central forces, inertial and non -inertial frames, Lagrange -
mechanics, vibrations and various type of oscillations in Advanced 
Mechanics. Through the acquisition of appropriate skills the student 
will discover the application of advanced mechanics and will be 
able to reflect upon the application thereof in  Physics and in the 
technological environment.  
o Presenting an overview of the development of classical mechanics 
from Galileo to Einstein  
o Providing students with knowledge and appreciation of the 
significance of special relativity.  
o Providing students with practical skills to execute advanced 
experiments in electricity, optics, mechanics and thermodynamics. 
To analyse , interpret and evaluate the collected data and to report 
on the experiments.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the definitions of physical quantities, the principles and the laws 
encountered, in classical mechanics and special relativity.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate advanced theoretical models in classical 
mechanics and special relativity.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems in advanced mechanics and waves.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of classical mechanics and special relativity 
in everyday life.  
  
   
165  
SC.5.1 6.12 PHYSICS    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   PHY00B2   Static and Dynamic Electromagnetism  
NQF Level     6 
Credits      16 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  PHYS1B1 and (MAT01A2 or ASMA2A1 and MAT02A2 or 
ASMA2A2) or APM02A2  
Purpose  To equip students with a working knowledge of the concepts and 
methods in electromagnetism: origins and use of the differential 
forms of the laws of Gauss, Ampere, and Faraday, Maxwell's 
equations, alternating currents, and the physics of magnetic 
material s. The student shall, by acquiring the appropriate skills, be 
able to discover the applications of electromagnetism, and be in a 
position to recognize the applications thereof in the technological 
environment. This module is also to provide the students wi th 
practical skills to execute advanced experiments in electricity, optics, 
mechanics and thermodynamics. To analyse , interpret and evaluate 
the collected data and to report on the experiments.   
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the definitions of physical quantities, the principles and the laws 
encountered in static and dynamic electromagnetism.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate advanced theoretical models in static and 
dynamic electromagnetism.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems in static and dynamic 
electromagnetism.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of in static and dynamic electromagnetism in 
everyday life.  
• To execute, collect data, and report on experiments electricity, optics, mechanics, and 
thermodynamics.  
 
 
SC.5.1 6.13 PHYSICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   PHY00Y2   Thermal Physics, Optics and Waves  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     8 
Presentation   Year  
Prerequisites   PHYS1B1 and MAT01B1 or ASMA1B1 or MATENB1   
 or ASME1B1  
Purpose  o This module is to provide qualifying students with intellectual and 
practical skills to analyse , interpret and apply scientific laws and 
methods in thermal physics, waves, optics and basic quantum 
mechanics. Through the acquisition of appropriate skills the student 
will discover the application of thermal physics, waves, optics and 
basic quantum phys ics and will be able to reflect upon the 
application thereof in Physics and in the technological environment.  
o This module is to provide students with practical skills to execute 
advanced experiments in electricity, optics, mechanics and 
thermodynamics. To analyse , interpret and evaluate the collected 
data and to report on the experiments.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the definitions of physical quantities, the principles and the laws 
encountered, in thermal physics, waves, optics and basic quantum physics.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate advanced theoretical models in thermal physics, 
waves, optics and basic quantum physics.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems in thermal physics, waves, optics and basic 
quantum physics.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of thermal physics, waves, optics and basic 
quantum physics in everyday life.  
  
   
166  
SC.5.1 6.14 PHYSICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   PHY00A3   Quantum Mechanics and Modern Physics  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites  PHY00A2, PHY00B2 and MAT01B2 or ASMA2B1 and MAT02B2 
or ASMA2B2 or APM02B2  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide qualifying students with 
intellectual and practical skills to analyse, interpret and apply scientific 
laws and methods in quantum mechanics and some fields of physics 
using these methods (nuclear and particle physic s). Through the 
acquisition of appropriate skills the student will discover the application 
of quantum mechanics, nuclear and particle physics and will be able to 
reflect upon the application thereof in other branches of physics and in 
the technological en vironment.  To provide the students with practical 
skills to execute experiments in electronics, to analyse , interpret, 
evaluate the collected data and to report on the experiments, and to 
apply this knowledge to everyday appliances.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and the definitions of physical quantities, the principles and the laws encountered 
in quantum mechanics.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate theoretical models in  quantum mechanics, 
nuclear and particle physics.  
• Integrate concepts and theories to solve problems in quantum mechanics, nuclear and particle 
physics.  
• Recognise and explain aspects of the application of quantum mechanics, nuclear and particle 
physics in other branches of physics and in technology.  
• Execute experimental projects in electronics effectively and responsibly.  
• Collect, analyse , interpret  and evaluate experimental data collected from experiments electronics.  
• Integrate the data collected in the experiments with elementary theories in electronics.  
• Write clear and concise reports on their experiments in electronics.  
 
SC.5. 16.15 PHYSICS    LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module    PHY00B3  Introduction to Statistical and Solid State Physics  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   PHY00A3  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide qualifying students with 
intellectual, mathematical and practical skills to analyse, interpret and 
apply concepts and functions in statistical physics . These concepts 
include Maxwell -Boltzmann, Bose -Einstein, Fermi -Dirac statistics, 
specific heat of solids, lasers, phonon and photon gas, free electron 
gas, and Bose condensation . The student is exposed to scientific laws 
and methods in working with crystal and electron structures, magnetic, 
electronic and superconducting properties of materials. Through the 
acquisition of appropriate skills, the student will discover the application 
of statistical and solid  state physics and will be able to reflect upon the 
application thereof in other branches of physics and in the technological 
environment.  The statistical physics and solid state physics sections 
are examined separately and the marks are combined to obtain the 
final course mark.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Grasp and master the mathematical formalism on which modern advanced physics is based . 
• Formulate, discuss and explain the definitions of physical quantities, the principles and the basic 
laws encountered in statistical physics and solid state physics.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate theoretical models in statistical physics and 
solid state physics.  
• Integrate concepts and theories to solve problems in statistical physics and solid state physics.   
   
167 • Recognize and explain aspects of the application of statistical physics and solid state physics 
in everyday life and in technology.  
• Conduct appropriate experimental work in the laboratory, analyse data and report her/his 
results.  
 
 
SC.5.16.16  PHYSICS    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module PHYE0A1  Engineering Physics 1A    
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 1  
Prerequisites  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation for the laws, 
principles and methods used in elementary mechanics, waves and 
heat. Through the acquisition of appropriate skills, the student will 
discover the application of the laws, principles and method s relating 
to elementary mechanics, waves and heat, and will be able to 
reflect on the role thereof in physics and the technological 
environment.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic definitions of physical quantities, the basic 
principles and the basic laws encountered in elementary mechanics, waves and heat.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in basic 
mechanics, waves and heat.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve elementary problems in basic mechanics, 
waves and heat.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of elementary mechanics, waves and heat 
in everyday life.  
 
 
SC.5.16.17  PHYSICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module PHYE0B1  Engineering Physics 1 B 
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 2  
Prerequisites  PHYE0A1  
Purpose  To supply students with the conceptual foundation for the laws, 
principles and methods used in Electricity, Magnetism and Optics. 
Through the acquisition of appropriate skills, the student will 
discover the application of the laws, principles and methods r elating 
to electricity, magnetism and optics, and will be able to reflect on 
the role thereof in physics and the technological environment.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss and explain the basic properties of electric charges, how one may 
generate these charges directly and indirectly.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate elementary theoretical models in 
electricity, magnetism and optics  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve elementary problems in basic electricity, 
magnetism and optics  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of electricity, magnetism and optics in 
everyday life.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
168 SC.5.16.18  PHYSICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   PHYE2A2   Engineering Physics 2: Static and Dynamic Electromagnetism  
NQF Level     6 
Credits      15  
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites  PHYE0B1 and MAT01A2 or MATECA2 or ASMA2A1 or 
ASME2A1 and MATEAA2 or ASME2A2 or MAT02A2 or 
ASMA2A2 or APME0A2  
Purpose  To equip electrical engineering students with a working knowledge 
of the theoretical concepts and methods in electromagnetism: origins 
and use of the differential forms of the laws of Gauss, Ampere, and 
Faraday, Maxwell's equations, alternating currents, a nd the physics 
of magnetic materials, as well as other physics topics relevant to 
modern electrical engineering applications. The student shall, by 
acquiring the appropriate skills, be able to discover the applications 
of electromagnetism, and be in a posi tion to recognize the 
applications thereof in the technological environment. This module is 
also to provide the students with practical skills to execute advanced 
experiments in electricity, optics, mechanics and thermodynamics. 
To analyse, interpret and e valuate the collected data and to report 
on the experiments.   
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Formulate, discuss  and explain the definitions of physical quantities, the principles and the laws 
encountered in static and dynamic electromagnetism, as well as other physics topics relevant 
to modern electrical engineering applications.  
• Derive equations in, explain, interpret and evaluate advanced theoretical models in static and 
dynamic electromagnetism.  
• Integrate basic concepts and theories to solve problems in static and dynamic 
electromagnetism.  
• Recognize and explain aspects of the application of in static and dynamic electromagnetism in 
everyday life.  
• To execute, collect data, and report on experiments electricity, optics, mechanics, and 
thermodynamics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SC.5.1 7 PHYSIOLOGY                         PHS 
 
Practicals form an integral part of the theory discussed during lectures. A sub -minimum of 40% for 
practicals is required for admission to semester examinations in Physiology.   
 
Practicals :   
PHS02A2 , PHS02B2  = 1 x 4 hours per week  
PHS03A3 , PHS03B3  = 1 x 4 hours per week  
 
A student needs a module mark of 40% to gain entrance to the final assessment opportunity. The 
semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A final mark of 50% is required to pass a 
module. The semester mark also contributes towards the calculation of the supplementary 
assessment.  The final result of a supplementary assessment is capped on 50%. The weights of 
assessments in each module e.g. practicals, assignments and theory for the determination of 
access to the final assessment are explained in the  learner guides.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
169  
SC.5. 17.1 PHYSIOLOGY   LEVEL  6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  PHS02A2   Basic Physiological Concepts and Movement  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation    Semester 1  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to enable the student to explain 
introductory concepts of physiology, including basic concepts of 
chemical reactions, functions of cellular components and the different 
tissue types. The student should also be able to discuss the 
relationship of structure and function of the integumentary, skeletal 
and muscular systems, with reference to related homeostatic 
imbalances  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this module , the students should be able to:  
• Explain introductory concepts of physiology and discuss homeostatic principles.  
• Explain basic concepts of chemistry and the general structure, biological functions and reactions 
of the important organic and inorganic compounds in the body.  
• Discuss the cellular organisation of the body by referring to the functions and interactions of the 
different cell components.  
• Microscopically identify the different tissue types and discuss the relationship of structure and 
function with special reference to inflammation and regeneration.  
• Discuss the structure and functions of the integument and related homeostatic imbalances.  
• Discuss the structure and function of the skeletal system.  
• Explain the principles of the neuromuscular junction and muscle contraction . 
 
 
SC.5. 17.2 PHYSIOLOGY   LEVEL  6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  PHS02B2   Control Systems  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Physiology ( PHS02A2 ) 
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to enable the student to understand 
and discuss the basic principles of the control systems, i.e. the 
nervous system and the endocrine system, including the structure 
and function of the central and peripheral nervous systems, the 
special senses, and all the tissues that make up t he endocrine 
system.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this  module , the students should be able to:  
• Explain the generation and propagation of an action potential.  
• Describe the effect of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators on the postsynaptic membranes.  
• Explain the processing of information in the neural tissue.  
• Explain basic histological, chemical, physical and physiological concepts of the nervous system.  
• Discuss structure and function of the different sections of the brain  
• Give an overview of the reflex activities of the nervous system with the aid of descriptive 
illustrations and diagrams.  
• Discuss basic concepts and interactions of the autonomic nervous system.  
• Give an overview of the general senses of the body.   
• Discuss the structure and function of the specific organs of the endocrine system and explain 
the functional aspects thereof.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
170 SC.5. 17.3 PHYSIOLOGY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  PHS03A3  Visceral Organ Systems  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites  Control Systems ( PHS02B2 ) 
Purpose  The purpose s of this module are to enable the student to explain 
histological and functional aspects of the cardiovascular system with 
special reference to blood test s, the cardiac cycle and blood 
circulation,  and  immunity , . To explain histological and functional 
aspects of the respiratory, digestive and urinary systems, and the 
basic principles of the pulmonary ventilation, digestion and urine 
formation . To discuss the histological and functional adaptations of 
the male and female reproductive systems, oogenesis, 
spermatogenesis, the process of fertilisation ,  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Discuss functional aspects of blood with reference to specific diagnostic blood tests.  
• Explain the histology and functional anatomy of the heart, as well as the electrical and 
mechanical aspects of the cardiac cycle.  
• Explain the basic concepts of the blood circulation.  
• Discuss the functional aspects of the lymphatic system to explain the non -specific and specific 
defence mechanisms of the body.  
• Microscopically identify the tissues of respiratory organs and explain physical and functional 
aspects thereof.  
• Microscopically identify the organs of the digestive tract and explain functional adaptations and 
implications thereof.  
• Microscopically identify the organs of the urinary system and discuss functional aspects with 
special reference to basic concepts of the formation of urine.  
• Explain histological and functional adaptations of the male and female reproductive organs.  
• Discuss oogenesis, spermatogenesis and related processes.  
• Explain the process of fertilisation, pregnancy, parturition.  
• Use dissections, descriptive illustrations and diagrams to explain foetal circulation and the 
changes that occur after birth.  
 
 
SC.5. 17.4 PHYSIOLOGY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  PHS03B3   Advanced Integration  
NQF Level     7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Visceral Organ Systems ( PHS03A3 ) 
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to explain the relationship between the 
interaction and integration of the specialized functions of the different 
organ systems to maintain homeostasis.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Discuss the interaction and control in positive and negative feedback mechanisms including 
blood clotting, labour and lactation.  
• Explain the principles of reflex activities with reference to neural, hormonal and humeral  control 
and the integration of neural and hormonal control.  
• Compare the interaction of the different organ systems to maintain metabolism, water balance 
regulation and reproduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
171 SC.5. 18 STATISTICAL METHODS                       SMT  
 
Only one of Mathematical Statistics or Statistical Methods or Analytical Techniques will be 
accredited if more than one is included in the same curriculum.  
 
 
SC.5. 18.1 STATISTICAL METHODS   LEVEL  5 (First Year)  
 
Module SMT01A1  Statistical Methods 1A  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 1 
Pre-requisite  Mathematics Grade 12 – APS 5  
Purpose  To provide the student with a perspective of the basics of probability 
theory and to illustrate its application to the s olution of practical problems. 
The student will also be given  a basic perspective of a variety of discrete 
probability distributions and will be able to apply them to solve problems 
in various fields of application.   
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Distinguish between different measurement scales.  
• Tabulate data and derive information from frequency distributions.  
• Derive and interpret information from graphical representations of data.  
• Describe a data set numerically in terms of location and spread.  
• Apply various elementary principles of probability theory.  
• Use the standardized normal distribution table to find probabilities.  
• Apply elementary principles of the sampling distribution of the mean.  
• Perform hypothesis testing.  
• Measure and model linear relationships between two variables.  
 
 
 
 
 
SC.5. 19 ZOOLOGY                                                                                                       ZOO  
 
Introduction to General Chemistry for Biological and Earth Sciences ( CEM1AC1 ) and 
Environmental Chemistry:  Atmosphere, Hydrosphere and Soil ( CEM1DB1 ) are compulsory 
ancillary modules for Zoology as a major.  
 
Excursions:  One long excursion is compulsory for students taking Ecology ( ZOO33A3 ) and 
Com parative Animal Physiology ( ZOO33B3 ) and Honours students.    
 
Practicals:  
ZOO11B1  = 1 x 3 hours per week  
ZOO22A2  = 1 x 4.5 hours per week  
ZOO22B2  = 1 x 4 .5 hours per week  
ZOO33A3  = 1 x 4.5 hours per week  
ZOO33B3  =  1 x 4.5 hours per week  
 
Practicals  form an integral part of the theory discussed during lectures. A sub -minimum of 40% for 
practicals is required for admission to se mester examinations in Zoology.  
 
A student needs a module mark of 40% to gain entrance to the final assessment opportunity. The 
semester and final assessment mark weight is 50:50. A student needs a final mark of 50% to pass 
a module.  The semester mark also contributes to the result of a supplementary assessment.  The 
final result of a supplementary assessment is capped on 50%. The weights of assessments in each 
module e.g. practicals, assignments and theory for the determination of access to the final 
assessment are explained in the learner  guides.  
 
 
  
   
172 SC.5. 19.1 ZOOLOGY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)   
 
Module ZOO11B1   Animal Diversity  
NQF Level     5 
Credits     15 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites  Biology 1A  (BIO10A1 ) or BIO1EB1  and BIO2EA1  
Purpose  In this semester module the student is introduced to the principles of 
animal classification. The description of fundamental characteristics of 
animal phyla and the morphology, general biology and special 
adaptations of the Cnidaria, Platyhelminthes, Nemat oda, Annelida, 
Mollusca, Arthropoda, Echinodermata and Chordata are also included.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Explain animal classification and the origin of the fundamental characteristics of the major 
animal phyla (Cnidaria, Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Mollusca, Arthropoda, 
Echinodermata and Chordata).  
• Describe the morphology and general biology of the major animal phyla (Cnidaria, 
Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Mollusca, Arthropoda, Echinodermata and Chordata).  
• Describe the morphology, general biology and special adaptations of the animals.  
• Collect, mount and classify insects up to Family level.  
• Demonstrate the ability to identify the anatomical features of the major animal phyla during 
practical sessions.  
 
SC.5. 19.2 ZOOLOGY    LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module ZOO22A2  General Parasitology  
NQF Level  6 
Credits    20 
Presentation  Semester 1 
Prerequisites  Animal Diversity ( ZOO11B1 ) 
Purpose  This module has the purpose to equip students with knowledge of the 
major parasitic diseases of humans, animals and plants.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Define, explain and explore fundamental concepts of parasite ecology.  
• Explain host parasite interfaces.  
• Identify and diagnose parasitic diseases.  
• Explain and explore life cycles of parasites.  
• Use an appropriate referencing system.  
• Discuss prevention and treatment of parasitic diseases.  
 
SC.5. 19.3 ZOOLOGY   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module ZOO22B2     Vertebrate anatomy, function and evolution.  
NQF Level     6 
Credits     20 
Presentation   Semester 2  
Prerequisites   Animal Diversity ( ZOO11B1 ) 
Purpose  Students are introduced to vertebrate classification, description of 
fundamental characteristics of vertebrates and the morphology, general 
biology and evolutionary history of the jawless and gnathostomate fishes 
and the morphology, general biology and evo lutionary adaptations of 
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals are covered.  Evolutionary 
traits from ontogenetic studies and investigations of the skulls of extinct 
and extant vertebrates are inferred.  The definition of zoogeographical 
regions of the w orld and understanding of vertebrate distribution within 
these regions are also done.  The different hypotheses on the origin and 
diversification of vertebrates and organic evolution are studied.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Discuss the characteristics used for the classification of the Vertebrata.  
• Discuss the hypotheses on the origin of the Vertebrata.  
• Describe the morphology, general biology and special adaptations of the vertebrate classes.   
   
173 • Define the zoogeographical regions of the world and explain the distribution of tetrapods within 
these zoogeographical regions.  
• Discuss the different evolutionary models and processes involved in organic evolution.  
• Demonstrate their ability to identify the anatomical features of the vertebrates during practical 
sessions.  
• Demonstrate their competency of doing inde pendent literature reviews.  
 
 
SC.5. 19.4 ZOOLOGY   LEVEL  7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  ZOO33A3   Ecology  
NQF Level    7 
Credits     30 
Presentation   Semester 1  
Prerequisites   - 
Purpose  This module has the purpose to equip students with the knowledge to 
be able to define and explain fundamental principles in ecology and 
the structure of an ecosystem. Learners will be able to discuss the 
limiting effects of the physical environment and bas ic principles of 
population and community ecology. Terrestrial, freshwater and 
marine ecosystems will be studied.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Discuss fundamental principles of population and community ecology ; including ecosystem 
structure and energy flow.  
• Explain the fundamental principles of various ecosystems including terrestrial, freshwater and 
marine.  
• Communicate aspects of ecology orally and in writing (e.g. scientific report writing, oral and 
poster presentations)   
 
SC.5. 19.5 ZOOLOGY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  ZOO33B3     Comparative Animal Physiology  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Term of presentation    Semester 2  
Prerequisites    BIO10A1  or BIO1EB1 , BIO2EA1  and CEM01A1  and CEM01B1  or  
 CEM1AC1  and CEM1DB1  
Purpose  To teach the necessary background knowledge to understand the 
principles of the physiological processes followed in different 
organisms and the integrated physiology of organs and organ 
systems in invertebrate and vertebrate organisms. The content 
supports the purpose of the programme in Life and Environmental 
Sciences.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the students should be able to:  
• Discuss the physical basis of neuronal function, communication along and between neurons 
and sensing the environment.  
• Write explanatory notes on the characteristics of cellular secretions.  
• Explain the mechanisms of hormone regulation and action.  
• Distinguish between muscle types.  
• Compare the mechanisms of movement in different animals.  
• Discuss the role of blood in the circulatory system as well as circulation in vertebrates and 
invertebrates.  
• Compare mechanisms of respiration in different organisms and understand the respiratory 
abilities of organisms in aquatic and terrestrial environments.  
• Comment on the effectiveness of the process of feeding, digestion and nutrition in different 
organisms.  
• Evaluate the importance of temperature regulation and the general effects of temperature on 
metabolism .   
   
174 PART 6  
 
 
SC.6  ACADEMIC SUPPORT PROGRAMMES IN THE FACULTY  
 
SC.6.1  BACHELOR OF SCIENCE  EXTENDED  DEGREE  
 
An Extended degree programme support s students who are unable to fully meet the requirements 
for direct entry into the different degree programmes. The programme prepare s students for 
continued studies in the Faculty of Science  with Foundational Provision modules . 
 
Entrance requirements for the various extended  degree programmes differ slightly and are listed 
in Part 1 of this booklet . 
 
Please note:  No student will be exempted from these modules.  
 
The following modules are incorporated to support students’ academic development  in the  
extended  qualifications : 
 
SC.6.1.1 COMPUT ER COMPETENCE  
 
Module  CCE1EXT  Computer Competence  1 
NQF -level  5 
Credits  6 
Presentation  Year module  
Purpose  The purpose of the module is to expose students to the basic concepts of 
information technology. Students will also be introduced to the use of word 
processing, spreadsheet s, graphical presentations and the Internet.  
Module learning outcomes: On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Basic principles and concepts of IT;  
• Use of MS Windows systems;  
• Use of the MS Office environment;  
• Use of Internet search engines and electronic mail.  
 
 
SC.6.1.2 LANGUAGE FOR SCIENCE  
 
Module  LSS01Y1  Language for Science  
NQF -level  5 
Credits  12 
Presentation  Year module  
Purpose  The main purpose of this module is to develop the academic literacy that 
students need for higher education, thereby facilitating learning and 
enabling them to succeed in their studies.  
NOTE: In order for a student to continue with the module in the 
second semester, a minimum half year mark of 40% is required.  
Module learning outcomes:  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify and apply the importance of language in academic reading, writing, annotation and 
vocabulary.  
• Access, process, evaluate and use information from a variety of sources and situations to apply 
in experimental environments such as laboratory report writing.  
• Identify and apply language and literacy practices and conventions in academic contexts.  
• Produce coherent and cohesive academic texts in a style appropriate to the chosen field of 
study.  
• Use appropriate communication strategies for specific purposes and situations.  
  
   
175 PART 7 
 
 
SC.7 LIST OF MODULES AND OUTCOMES PRESENTED BY THE FACULTY OF 
SCIENCE AS PART OF THE TEACHER  PROGRAMMES TO THE FACULTY 
OF EDUCATION  
 
SC.7.1 MODULES IN BEd PROGRAMME  
 
SC NO  MODULE  CODE  
7.1.1  Geography 1A for FET  GR1AFET  
7.1.1  Geography 1B for FET  GR1BFET  
7.1.2  Geography 2A for FET  GR2AFET  
7.1.2  Geography 2B for FET  GR2BFET  
7.1.3  Geography 3A for FET  GR3AFET  
7.1.3  Geography 3B for FET  GR3BFET  
7.1.4  Life Sciences 1A for FET  LSFT0A1  
7.1.5  Life Sciences 1B for FET  LSFT0B1  
7.1.6  Life Sciences 2A for FET  LSFT0A2  
7.1.7  Life Sciences 2B for FET  LSFT0B2  
7.1.8  Life Sciences 3A for FET  LSFT0A3  
7.1.9  Life Sciences 3B for FET  LSFT0B3  
7.1.10  Mathematics 1A for FET  MAFT0A1  
7.1.11  Mathematics 1B for FET  MAFT0B1  
7.1.12  Mathematics 2A for FET  MAFT0A2  
7.1.13  Mathematics 2B for FET  MAFT0B2  
7.1.14  Mathematics 3A for FET  MAFT0A3  
7.1.15  Mathematics 3B for FET  MAFT0B3  
7.1.16  Physical Sciences 1A for FET (Physics)  PSFT0A1  
7.1.17  Physical Sciences 1B for FET (Chemistry)  PSFT0B1  
7.1.18  Physical Sciences 2A for FET (Physics)  PSFT0A2  
7.1.19  Physical Sciences 2B for FET (Chemistry)  PSFT0B2  
7.1.20  Physical Sciences 3A for FET (Physics)  PSFT0A3  
7.1.21  Physical Sciences 3B for FET (Chemistry)  PSFT0B3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
176  
SC.7.1 OUTCOMES OF MODULES IN BEd PROGRAMMES  
 
SC.7.1. 1 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  GR1AFET and   
   GR1BFET  Geography 1A for FET  
Geography 1B for FET  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 1 and 2  
Prerequisites  Grade 12 Physical Science (min APS 3) or Grade 12 Life Sciences 
(min APS 3) and Mathematics (min APS 4) or Mathematics Literacy 
(min APS 6);  and Geography   (min APS 3)  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide geography educators with the 
content knowledge, applied skills and methods needs to effectively and 
efficiently teach Grade 10 -12 (FET) Geography at school level.  
 
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and explain the basic concepts within human population studies (including HIV/AIDs), 
physical geography (climatology and geomorphology) and environmental issues (such as water 
management, oceans and floods).  
• Critically engage with various theoretical concepts and paradigms within human population 
studies and environmental science.  
• Formulate appropriate responses to the challenges facing the global population, such as aging, 
mortality patterns and environmental problems.  
• Describe the nature of the South African population and the challenges facing the country in 
terms of population.  
• Engage with appropriate cartographic methods [maps, diagrams, graphs and statistics] to 
deconstruct, describe and infer meaning.  
• Demonstrate competence in conducting practical work or investigations.  
• Write scientifically in academically appropriate ways.  
• Know, understand and comply with the norms and standards of professional, ethical and 
academic conduct.  
• Describe, explain be able to use the basic methods used to teach and assess human population 
studies, physical geography and environmental issues at FET level.  
• Design an appropriate teaching, learning and assessment units of work for Grade 10 -12 (FET) 
Geography taking relevant contextual issues into account.  
 
 
SC.7.1. 2 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 6 (Second  Year)  
 
Module   GR2AFET and  
    GR2BFET  Geography 2A for FET  
Geography 2B for FET  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester 1 and 2  
Prerequisites  GR1AFET and GR1BFET  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide geography educators with the 
content knowledge, applied skills and methods needs to effectively and 
efficiently teach Grades 10 -12 (FET) Geography at school level.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and explain the basic concepts within development studies (including trade), physical 
geography (climatology, geomorphology and soil science) and environmental issues (such as 
energy management, sustainability and resources).  
• Critically engage with various theoretical concepts and paradigms within development studies 
and sustainable development.  
• Formulate appropriate responses to the developmental challenges facing the global  to local 
population.  
• Engage with appropriate cartographic methods [maps, diagrams, graphs and statistics] to 
deconstruct, describe and infer meaning.   
   
177 • Demonstrate competence in conducting practical work or investigations.  
• Write scientifically in academically appropriate ways.  
• Know, understand and comply with the norms and standards of professional, ethical and 
academic conduct, such as how and why to avoid plagiarism, how to cite sources correctly 
amongst others.  
• Describe, explain be able to use the basic methods used to teach and assess development 
studies, physical geography and environmental issues at FET level.  
• Design an appropriate teaching, learning and assessment units of work for Grade 10 -12 (FET) 
Geography taking relevant contextual issues into account.  
 
 
SC.7.1. 3 GEOGRAPHY   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module    GR3AFET and  
     GR3BFET  Geography 3A for FET  
Geography 3B for FET  
NQF Level  6 
Credits   15 
Presentation  Semester 1 and 2  
Prerequisites  GR2AFET and GR2BFET  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide geography educators with the 
content knowledge, applied skills and methods needs to effectively and 
efficiently teach Grades 10 -12 (FET) Geography at school level.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and explain the basic concepts within economic geography, settlement geography and 
physical geography (climatology and geomorphology).  
• Critically engage with various theoretical concepts and paradigms within economic and 
settlement geography.  
• Formulate appropriate responses to the economic and urban challenges facing the global 
population and South Africa in particular.  
• Engage with appropriate cartographic methods [maps, diagrams, graphs] to deconstruct, 
describe and infer meaning within geographical issues.  
• Demonstrate competence in conducting practical GIS work.  
• Write scientifically in academically appropriate ways.  
• Know, understand and comply with the norms and standards of professional, ethical and 
academic conduct, such as how and why to avoid plagiarism.  
• Describe, explain be able to use the basic methods used to teach and assess economic 
geography, settlement geography and physical geography at FET level.  
• Design an appropriate teaching, learning and assessment units of work for Grade 10 -12 (FET) 
Geography taking relevant contextual issues into account.  
 
 
SC.7.1.4 LIFE SCIENCE    LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   LSFT0A1  Life Sciences 1A for FET  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  Grade 12 Mathematics  (APS 4) or Grade 12 Mathematical Literacy 
(min. APS 6) and Physical Sciences or Life Sciences  (min. APS 4)  
Purpose   The purpose of the module is to provide life science educators with the 
advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary to relevantly teach 
the structure and functions of the molecules of life, the basic structure 
of a cell, cell division, structure and f unctions of different organic tissues 
needed at grade 10, 11 and 12 level as part of the FET Life Science 
curriculum  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify, discuss  and interpret the organization, structure and functions of the various plant - and 
animal tissues.  
• Identify and discuss the different biological compounds as related to their role in the biotic 
environment and human health.  
• Understand and apply the knowledge of the emergent properties of water in a specific 
environment and how that affects quality of life.   
   
178 • Analyse and examine the structure, functions and division process of the fundamental units of 
life: cells.  
• Communicate and present information skilfully, scientifically and professionally and integrate an 
awareness of applicable ethical issues.  
• Make competent use of biological methodology and laboratory and field investigation 
techniques.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for the teaching of Grade10 to 12 content.  
• Effectively assess the Grade 10 and 11 Life Science content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.5 LIFE SCIENCE   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  LSFT0B1  Life Sciences 1B for FET  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  LSFT0A1 
Purpose   The purpose of the module is to provide life science educators with the 
advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary to relevantly teach 
the processes needed to produce food and energy by plants, structure 
and functions of the human digestive - and respiratory systems, 
functioning of the ecosystems in the biosphere, biodiversity, 
classification and history of life on Earth needed at grade 10, 11 and 
12 level as part of the FET Life Science curriculum.  
 
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify, discuss and interpret the organization, structure and functions of the various parts of 
the human digestive – and respiratory systems.  
• Understand and discuss the importance of the processes used by living organisms to produce 
energy for metabolic functioning.    
• Analyse, discuss, understand and interpret the vital life processes that occur in plants through 
the exploration of cellular respiration and photosynthesis.  
• Demonstrate the comprehensive understanding of ecology and related ecosystems with regard 
to the different biomes in the biosphere.  
• Realize and understand the enormous biodiversity on Earth and the classification systems 
needed to organize this vast number of species.  
• Comprehend the history of life on Earth with regard to theories and research.  
• Communicate and present information skilfully, scientifically and professionally and integrate an 
awareness of applicable ethical issues.  
• Make competent use of biological methodology and laboratory and field investigation 
techniques.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for the teaching of Gr ade10 to 12 content.  
• Effectively assess the Gr ade 10 and 11 life science content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.6 LIFE SCIENCE LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   LSFT0A2  Life Sciences 2A for FET  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    20 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  LSFT0A1 and LS FT0B1  
Purpose   The purpose of the module is to provide life science educators with the 
advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary to relevantly teach 
the structure and functioning of various micro -organisms, biodiversity 
of plants and animals, including invertebrat es, support systems vital in 
plants and animals, needed for grade 10, 11 and 12 level as part of the 
FET Life Science curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify and explain the complexity of several micro -organisms.  
• Understand and discuss the vital role of diversity of plants and animals in different ecosystems.   
   
179 • Specialize in the structure and functioning of certain invertebrates that play a role in the diversity 
structure of an ecosystem.  
• Identify, examine and interpret the structures and functioning of the support systems found in 
plants and humans.  
• Communicate and present information skilfully, scientifically and professionally and integrate an 
awareness of applicable ethical issues.  
• Make competent use of biological methodology and laboratory and field investigation 
techniques.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for the teaching of Gr ade 1 0 to 12 content . 
• Effectively assess the Gr ade 10 and 12 life science content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.7 LIFE SCIENCE   LEVEL 5 (Second Year)  
 
Module  LSFT0B2  Life Sciences 2 B for FET  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    20 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  LSFT0A2  
Purpose   The purpose of the module is to provide life science educators with the 
advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary to relevantly teach 
human biological processes and structures of vital human systems like 
transport and excretion, population ecology, human influences on the 
environment, evolution by natural selection and human evolution 
needed for grade 10, 11 and 12 level as part of the FET Life Science 
curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify and explain the different parts and functions of the human circulatory - and excretion 
systems.  
• Understand and discuss the concept of population ecology and how it plays a role in the survival 
of species on earth.  
• Analy se and apply knowledge of evolution and human evolution to comprehend the 
fundamentals of life and biology as a unit in totality.  
• Communicate and present information skilfully, scientifically and professionally and integrate an 
awareness of applicable ethical issues.  
• Make competent use of biological methodology and laboratory and field investigation 
techniques.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for the teaching of Gr ade 1 0 to 12 content.  
• Effectively assess the Gr ade 10 and 12 life science content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.8 LIFE SCIENCE   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  LSFT0A3  Life Sciences 3A for FET  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  LSFT0A2  and LS FT0B2  
Purpose   The purpose of the module is to provide life science educators with 
advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary to actively and 
relevantly teach the structure and functions of the units of heredity, 
meiosis, reproduction in vertebrates and ultimately human reproduction 
and the concepts that lead to life or death, needed beyond a grade 12 
level.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify the major patterns of inheritance as well as the associated processes.  
• Analyse, discuss, understand and interpret the genetic laws and diagrams.  
• Apply knowledge about biotechnology hands -on. 
• Understand, identify and apply the knowledge of reproductive systems to the validity of life on 
earth.  
• Communicate and present information skilfully, scientifically and professionally and integrate an 
awareness of applicable ethical issues.   
   
180 • Make competent use of biological methodology and laboratory and field investigation 
techniques.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for the teaching of Grade 10  to 12 content s. 
• Effectively assess the Grade 10 and 12 life science content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.9 LIFE SCIENCE   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   LSFT0B3  Life Sciences 3B for FET  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    30 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  LSFT0A3  
Purpose   The purpose of the module is to provide life science educators with 
advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary to actively and 
relevantly teach the structure and functions of the vital human 
metabolic systems and senses, chemical coordination and pla nt 
hormones, needed beyond a grade 12 level.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Identify, discuss  and interpret the structural functioning of the human nervous and chemical 
coordination systems.  
• Analyse, discuss, understand and interpret the use of sense as an effect on environmental 
stimuli.  
• Comprehend the role of plant hormones in the survival of plants on Earth.  
• Identify and apply the knowledge of the endocrine and nervous systems of humans to 
understand the occurrence of certain diseases with regard to these systems.  
• Communicate and present information skilfully, scientifically and professionally and integrate an 
awareness of applicable ethical issues.  
• Make competent use of biological methodology and laboratory and field investigation 
techniques.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for the teaching of Grade 10 to 12 content s. 
• Effectively assess the Grade 10 and 12 life science content.  
 
 
 
SC.7.1.1 0 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MAFT0A1  Mathematics 1A for FET  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    15 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  Grade 12 Mathematics (min. APS 4) or  
Grade 12 Mathematical Literacy (min. APS 6)  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional mathematics 
educators with the knowledge, skills and content necessary to 
effectively teach the FET (Grades 10 – 12) Mathematics curriculum. 
The primary focus of this module is Pre -calculus content with a focus 
on functions.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Use fundamental algebraic techniques to simplify mathematical expressions and solve 
mathematical equations and inequalities.  
• Define complex numbers and solve for complex zeros.  
• Draw graphs of polynomial, rational, exponential and logarithmic and inverse functions.  
• Use mathematical thinking processes, reasoning and communication skills to interpret and deal 
with mathematical situations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
181  
SC.7.1.1 1 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module  MAFT0B1  Mathematics 1B for FET  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester module  
Prerequisites  MAFT0A1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional mathematics 
educators with the knowledge, skills and content necessary to 
effectively teach the FET (Grades 10 – 12) Mathematics curriculum. 
The primary focus of this module is Pre -calculus content  with a focus 
on trigonometry functions and Euclidean geometry . 
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Convert between radian and degree measure.  
• Apply trigonometry identities to simplify expressions and solve equations.  
• Use the Law of Sine’s  and Cosines to solve problems regarding real life applications.  
• Draw the graphs and interpret trigonometry functions and inverse functions.  
• Solve problems and apply theory that involves Euclidean geometry.  
• Use mathematical thinking processes, reasoning and communication skills to interpret and deal 
with mathematical situations  
 
 
SC.7.1.1 2 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  MAFT0A2  Mathematics 2A for FET  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  MAFT0A1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional mathematics 
educators with the knowledge, skills and content necessary to 
effectively teach the FET (Grades 10 – 12) Mathematics curriculum. 
The primary focus of this module is the study of Sequences and Series, 
Counting Methods, F inancial Mathematics and Statistics . 
Module learning outcomes :  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply the functionalities of arithmetic and geometric sequences and series.  
• Apply the principles of Mathematical Induction.  
• Apply algebraic concepts and skills to solve problems regarding financial mathematics.  
• Organise, represent and analyse data for effective and valid interpretation.  
• Study the probability of an event and solve real life related problems.  
• Use educational scientific calculators in the teaching of mathematics.  
• Use mathematical thinking processes, reasoning and communication skills to interpret and deal 
with mathematical situations  
 
 
SC.7.1.1 3 MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module  MAFT0B2  Mathematics 2B for FET  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  MAFT0B1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional mathematics 
educators with the knowledge, skills and content necessary to 
effectively teach the FET (Grades 10 – 12) Mathematics curriculum. 
The primary focus of this module is the theory and application s of 
differentiation.  
Module learning outcomes :  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Solve systems of equations and inequalities in several variables.  
• Decompose fractional expressions as partial fractions.  
• Calculate limits numerically, graphically and algebraically.   
   
182 • Define and describe the basic theoretical concepts underlying differentiation.  
• Apply the basic concepts of differentiation to solve calculus -related problems.  
• Apply the applications of differentiation to sketch curves . 
 
 
SC.7.1.14  MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7  (Third Year)  
 
Module  MAFT0A3  Mathematics 3 A for FET  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  MAFT0B2  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide intentional mathematics 
educators with the knowledge, skills and content necessary to 
effectively teach the FET (Grades 10 – 12) Mathematics curriculum. 
The primary focus of this module is the theory and application s of 
integration.  
Module learning outcomes :  On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define and describe the basic theoretical concepts underlying integration.  
• Apply calculus to exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions.  
• Apply the basic concepts of integration to solve calculus -related problems.  
• Proof theorems applicable in the teaching of Mathematics.  
• Use the applications of L’Hôpital’s Rule.  
 
 
SC.7.1.15  MATHEMATICS   LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module  MAFT0B3  Mathematics 3B for FET  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Semester Module  
Prerequisites  MAFT0B1  
Purpose  The purpose of this module is to provide intentional mathematics 
educators with the knowledge, skills and content necessary to 
effectivel y teach the FET (Grades 10 – 12) Mathematics curriculum. 
The primary focus of this module is linear algebra and discrete 
mathematics.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Define polar coordinates, draw graphs of polar equations and perform operations with polar 
form of complex numbers.  
• Perform operations with vectors in two and three dimensions.  
• Solve linear systems using matrices.  
• Apply the algebra of matrices, find the inverses of matrices and solve matrix equations.  
• Calculate determinants of matrices and apply Cramer’s Rule.  
• Apply theory involving analytic geometry in working with conics.  
• Define basic logical concepts and apply formal logical deductive systems to prove logical 
consequences and (non)validities in propositional and first -order logic.  
• Define and apply basic concepts in set theory.  
• Use mathematical thinking processes, reasoning and communication skills to interpret and deal 
with mathematical situations.  
 
   
   
183  
SC.7.1.16 PHYSICAL SCIENCES   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   PSFT0A1  Physical Science 1 for FET  (Physics)  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Year Module  
Prerequisites  Grade 12 Physical Science and Mathematics  (APS min. 4) 
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional physical sciences 
educators with the basic knowledge, skills and content necessary for 
effective teaching of grade 10 -12 Physics part of the FET Physical 
Sciences curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe the nature of physical science and use the relevant science and mathematical skills, 
methods and language to investigate phenomena and to solve physics problems in real life.  
• Explain and predict events in our physical environment  
• Use and apply knowledge and understanding of  facts, concepts , principles and theories 
related  to kinematics in one and two dimensions, forces and Newton’s laws of motion, work 
and energy , temperature and heat, electric forces and electric fields, electric potential energy 
and electric potential, reflection and refraction of light.  
• Demonstrate competence in conducting practical work/ experiments or investigations.  
• Design a teaching and learning strategy for grade 10 -12 Physics part of Physical Science in 
FET Band.  
• Effectively assess the grade 10 - 12 Physics content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.17 PHYSICAL SCIENCES   LEVEL 5 (First Year)  
 
Module   PSFT0B1  Physical Science 1 for FET  (Chemistry)  
NQF Level    5 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Year module  
Prerequisites  Grade 12 Physical Science and Mathematics  (APS min.  4) 
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional physical sciences 
educators with the basic knowledge, skills and content necessary for 
effective teaching of grade 10 -12 Chemistry part of the FET Physical 
Sciences curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Describe and use chemical vocabulary.  
• Perform chemical calculations and do appropriate unit conversions.  
• Describe the structure of atoms, ions, anions, cations and simple molecules.  
• Identify a limiting reactant through mole ratios, calculate percentage yield and perf orm 
stoichiometric calculations, including solutions.  
• Write balanced chemical equations for different types of chemical reactions (combustion, 
combination, decomposition , single and double displacement , acid -base and redox reactions ). 
• Describe the behaviour of ideal and non -ideal gases and apply it in calculations.  
• Compare different acid -base models and do simple calculations relating to acid -base chemistry.  
• Explain and apply the concepts of modern atomic theory.  
• Explain the causes and consequences of periodicity.  
• Show an understanding of chemistry and its implications in society ( the hydrosphere, water and 
nitrogen cycles).  
• Demonstrate competence in doing practical work/ experiments/ investigations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
184 SC.7.1.18 PHYSICAL SCIENCES   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   PSFT0A2  Physical Science 2 for FET  (Physics)  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Year module  
Prerequisites  PSFT0A1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional physical sciences 
educators with the advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary 
for ef fective teaching of grades 10 -12 Chemistry section of the FET 
Physical Sciences curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
Do a critical study of the First Year level Chemistry Assessments Standards (content) for Physical 
Science to address the Learning Outcome 1, 2 and 3:  
• Describe in detail the nature of physics and use the relevant science and mathematical skills, 
methods and language to investigate phenomena and solve physics problems.  
• Investigate physical phenomena through scientific inquiry.  
• Explain and predict events in our physical environment.  
• Understand how the physical environment works, how to benefit from it and how to care for it 
responsibly  
• Use and apply knowledge and understanding of facts, concepts, principles and theories relating 
to the Dynamics of uniform circular motion, impulse and momentum, electric circuits, magnetic 
forces and fields, waves and sound, the principle of linear superpo sition and interference, the 
wave nature of light.  
• Demonstrate competence in doing practical work/ experiments/ investigations.  
• Effectively teach and assess the Grade 12 to first year Physics parts of FET Physical Sciences 
content.  
 
 
SC.7.1.19 PHYSICAL SCIENCES   LEVEL 6 (Second Year)  
 
Module   PSFT0B2  Physical Science 2 for FET  (Chemistry)  
NQF Level    6 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Year module  
Prerequisites  PSFT0B1  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional physical sciences 
educators with the advanced knowledge, skills and content necessary 
for effective teaching of grades 10 and 11 Physics parts of the FET 
Physical Sciences curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Apply the principles of atomic and molecular structure to solve problems related to chemical 
bonding and molecular shapes including the role intermolecular forces have on the properties 
of compounds.  
• Do basic stoichiometric calculations involving solutions  
• Describe the concept s of reaction kinetics and dynamic equilibrium, write equilibrium constants 
equations and predict the effect of stresses applied to systems in equilibrium.  
• Discuss different acid -base theories and perform quantitative calculations involving acid -base 
reactions.  
• Identify redox reactions, balance these using half reactions, apply the knowledge in 
electrochemical cells , and use in various calculations . 
• Define and apply principles of thermochemistry and use Hess’ law of summation . 
• Introduction to organic chemistry: functional groups, IUPAC naming , isomerism, basic 
substitution, addition and elimination reactions  and their respective mechanisms . 
• Demonstrate competence in planning and doing practical work/ experiments/ investigations.  
• Show an understanding of chemistry and its implications in society ( the lithosphere and mining).  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
185  
SC.7.1.20 PHYSICAL SCIENCES LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   PSFT0A3  Physical Science 3 for FET (Physics)  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Year module  
Prerequisites  PSFT0A2  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional Physical Science 
educators with the advanced knowledge, skills and higher education 
content necessary for effective teaching of grades 10 -12 of the FET 
Physical Sciences curriculum.  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
Do a critical study of the Gr 10 -12 Curriculum and advanced Physics up to third year university 
level Assessments Standards (content) for physical science to address the Learning Outcome 1, 2 
and 3:  
• Use and apply knowledge and understanding of facts, concepts, principles  and theories 
relating to the following: Rotational kinematics and dynamics, simple harmonic motion and 
elasticity, electromagnetic induction, alternate current circuits, electromagnetic waves, special 
relativity, particles and waves.  
• Demonstrate competence in doing practical work/ experiments/ investigations.  
• Effectively teach and assess the Grade 12 to first year Physics parts of FET Physical Sciences 
content.  
 
SC.7.1.21  PHYSICAL SCIENCES LEVEL 7 (Third Year)  
 
Module   PSFT0B3  Physical Science 3 for FET (Chemistry)  
NQF Level    7 
Credits    16 
Presentation  Year module  
Prerequisites  PSFT0B2  
Purpose   The purpose of this module is to provide intentional Physical Science 
educators with the advanced knowledge, skills and higher education 
content necessary for effective teaching of grades 10 -12 Chemistry 
section of the FET Physical Sciences curriculum  
Module learning outcomes : On completion of this learning event, the student should be able to:  
• Use and apply knowledge and understanding of facts, concepts, principles and theories relating 
to organic molecules (organic molecule structures, functional groups , systematic naming and 
structure , basic reactions  and mechanisms , physical properties and relationships ) and 
macromolecule s (plastics , polymers, biological macromolecules, structure, properties and 
function) . 
• Explain and apply additional aspects of acid -base equilibria such as the common -ion effect and 
buffers.  
• Integrate and apply concepts in electrochemistry related to electrochemical cells and 
electrochemical changes  including calculations . 
• Describe and appl y principles of thermodynamics . 
• Apply basic principles of reaction kinetics to determine the reaction rates of reactions  (limited to 
zero and first order reactions only) . 
• Demonstrate competence in planning and doing practical work/ experiments/ investigations.  
• Show an understanding of chemistry and its implications in society (chemical industry resources 
like in Sasol.  
 
  
   
186 PART 8 
 
SC.8 MODULES IN SCIENCE PROGRAMMES THAT ARE OFFERED BY 
OTHER FACULTIES  
 
MODULES FROM THE COLLEGE  OF BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS  
 
ACCOUNTING ( ACC ) 
BUSINESS MANAGEMENT (BMA)  
ECONOMICS ( ECO ) 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ( FNM ) 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (IMA)  
INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT (IVM)  
IT MANAGEMENT (ITM)  
 
MODULES FROM THE FACULTY OF ENGINEERING AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT  
 
ELECTROTECHNICS (ETN)  
PROJECT MANAGEMENT (PJB)  
SIGNALS AND SYSTEMS 3A (SST EEA3 ) 
SIGNAL PROCESSING 3B ( SIGEEB3 ) 
 
MODULES FROM THE FACULTY OF HUMANITIES  
 
ANTHROPOLOGY AND DEVELOPMENT (ATL)  
PSYCHOLOGY (PSY)  
SOCIOLOGY ( SOC ) 
SPORT PSYCHOLOGY (S PP) 
 
 